'A contaminated prison': Scared, angry passengers are trapped on three cruise ships amid coronavirus outbreak.
it's a precious moment for families around the world when twilight falls, children yawn and bedtime routines engage.
yet the places where children sleep, the time they lay down at night and even how they prepare for shut-eye vary across cultures.
even differences in children's bedrooms around the world can be striking, as in venice-based photographer james mollison's photo series "where children sleep," which has been adapted into a book.
though it has been nearly seven years since the series was published, the photographs still spark conversation as they turn a lens to bedtime around the globe.
while photographing the series, "i met many families who sleep together in one room or children who sleep in a space of convenience, rather than a place they can in any sense call their room," mollison said.
"i came to appreciate just how privileged i was to have had my own bedroom to sleep in and grow," he said.
"i met children who had literally nothing except for a place to sleep and other children who couldn't move for all their toys. "
here is a sampling of what bedtime looks like in households around the world.
drastic differences in babies' bedtimes while researching children's sleep across the globe, clinical psychologist jodi mindell was surprised to discover significant differences in bedtimes for infants and toddlers based on where they lived.
she described the differences as "unbelievable. "
"when i walked into doing this study, i really thought we would see 10- or 15-minute differences," said mindell, a professor at saint joseph's university in philadelphia and associate director of the sleep center at children's hospital of philadelphia.
it turned out, however, "we're seeing these 21⁄2-hour differences between some countries like australia and new zealand with other countries like hong kong and korea," she said.
"bedtimes ranged dramatically across cultures. "
mindell and her colleagues analyzed how the parents of 29,287 infants and toddlers, up to 3 years old, responded to questionnaires about their children's bedtimes.
those findings were published in the journal sleep medicine in 2010.  the parents were from china, hong kong, india, indonesia, korea, japan, malaysia, the philippines, singapore, taiwan, thailand, vietnam, australia, canada, new zealand, the united kingdom and the united states.
they completed the questionnaires between may and june 2006, september and december 2007 and april 2008.   the researchers found that the latest bedtimes were reported among parents in hong kong, who on average reported bedtimes about 10:17 p. m. , whereas the earliest bedtimes were reported among parents in new zealand: around 7:28 p. m. , on average.
the study was sponsored by pharmaceutical company johnson & johnson, and mindell has served as a consultant for the company.
bedtimes also appear to vary across european countries, said sara harkness, a professor and director of the center for the study of culture, health, and human development at the university of connecticut.
she was not involved in the sleep medicine study but has conducted research on children's activities and bedtimes.
"we certainly did find in our research in spain that early bedtimes were not common for young children.
in fact, on one occasion, our spanish colleague invited us to watch preschool children in a performance at a local festival starting about 11 p. m. ," harkness said.
"the most dramatic contrast we've seen to this pattern is in the netherlands, where babies and young children are put to bed at around 6:30 or 7 and expected to sleep through the night in their own bed, often in their own room," she said.
on the other hand, "in small-scale traditional preindustrial societies such as the kipsigis people of kenya, where we did research in the 1970s, babies were always in close proximity to caretakers, generally their mother or an older sibling, and they slept anywhere and any time," she said.
around the world, there are not only differences in when babies snooze but in what happens before they slumber.
parents try it all to get babies to sleep in the united states, it's common for parents to prepare their children for bedtime with a soothing bath followed by a lullaby or, for older kids, a book.
yet around the world, bedtime routines involve a different approach, and in some places, they appear to be less common.
"one of the biggest similarities is that most families include in their child's bedtime routine, for 0-3, some type of feeding, whether it's breastfeeding or bottle-feeding or snacks, and that's consistent across all countries, but if we take that out, there's big differences in activities like bathing," mindell said, citing her own research.
in the us, "60% of families have a bath as part of their bedtime routine.
it's even higher in the united kingdom at 81%.
but somewhere like india, only 13%.
in indonesia, it's only 6%," she said.
"they typically bathe in the morning or at another time of the day. "
there are also regional differences in which bedtime routines include prayers, mindell added.
"in the philippines, 29% of families -- basically one out of three families -- include prayers as part of their bedtime routine," she said.
"whereas some place like australia, only 6% did.
in indonesia, 30% include prayers as part of their bedtime routine. "
once the time comes to actually get some shut-eye, parents use different approaches to get their children to sleep.
in korea, harkness said, parents often sleep with their babies to help them drift into dreamland, but dutch parents tend to leave their babies alone in their rooms, where the children must learn to put themselves to sleep.
"the dutch parents in our studies strongly supported a cultural rule of the 'three r's' of childrearing -- rust, regelmaat, en reinheid, or 'rest, regularity and cleanliness' -- which entailed establishing a firm routine featuring plenty of sleep on a regular schedule from an early age," harkness said.
who bed-shares, and who doesn't similar differences emerge among bed-sharing practices.
"co-sleeping is the usual practice in preindustrial societies around the world where there are no special beds for babies to sleep safely by themselves.
co-sleeping on mats on the floor is a cultural norm in asia, where the family traditionally co-sleeps together in the same room.
mats are brought out at night, then stored during the day so the same room is both a living room and a sleeping room," harkness said.
"we found more tolerance for co-sleeping for at least part of the night for babies and young children in european communities we studied, but this may have changed more recently following pediatric advice," she said.
in the united states, the american academy of pediatrics recommends against sharing a bed with your infant and says "there is insufficient evidence to recommend for or against the use of devices promoted to make bed-sharing 'safe. '
" "the us parents seem to receive more strict guidance, especially from pediatricians, about avoiding co-sleeping," harkness said.
"this is part of a larger set of advice about sleeping arrangements, including not using padded 'bumpers' around cribs, having the baby sleep on its back and not using covers such as quilts or blankets for babies -- all for the same purpose of avoiding the danger of suffocation. "
'bedtime routines are the perfect package' all in all, bedtime routines can benefit a child's development, mindell said.
"bedtime routines are the perfect package for not only sleep, but for promoting positive child development," mindell said.
"children who have consistent bedtime routines not only sleep better, but it also promotes things like literacy, attachment, language, bonding and self-care -- all the things that we want children to have, whether or not they live in india or whether they live in the united states," she said.
it was supposed to be the holiday of a lifetime.
instead, american couple kent and rebecca frasure found themselves quarantined on a cruise ship, staring at ambulances lined up on land ready to receive the increasing toll of passengers diagnosed with a deadly virus.
on friday morning, rebecca, 35, found out she had tested positive for wuhan coronavirus and had to leave the ship immediately -- alone, as her husband kent, 42, was still apparently uninfected.
her only symptom when she tested positive was a cough.
"it is terrible, i could never imagine that this could be happening right now," she told cnn shortly before she left the boat.
"(the hardest part) is the unknown.
like, i don't know what's going to happen an hour from now. "
the diamond princess cruise ship, on which the frasures were traveling, has been quarantined off the coast of yokohama, near tokyo, since tuesday, after a former passenger tested positive for the coronavirus.
there are more than 3,700 people on board, including 2,600 passengers, of whom 428 are american.
so far, 61 passengers have tested positive for the virus, and the quarantine is expected to last until at least february 19.    so far more than 31,400 people globally have been infected by the pneumonia-like coronavirus, which originated in the central chinese city of wuhan, and at least 630 have died, predominantly in mainland china.
three cruise ships in asia, including the diamond princess, have had their journeys disrupted or brought to a halt by the virus.
in the middle of the east china sea, the westerdam is struggling to find a port to dock at after being turned away from both taiwan and japan over fears of passenger contamination.
meanwhile, in hong kong, the world dream cruise ship has been held in quarantine since docking wednesday, after eight former passengers tested positive for the virus.
fear on the diamond princess after rebecca was diagnosed, kent says no one came to disinfect the room the couple shared.
he believes it is only a matter of time before he is diagnosed with the virus, too.
"(but) you roll with the punches and try to make the best of things as you can," he said.
information from the cruise staff has been scant and he only found out that a further 41 passengers had been diagnosed with the virus after talking to a reporter, he said.
"the only way anybody knows (what is happening) is when people that are infected tell other people they've been infected," he said.
american author gay courter is also among the more than 2,600 passengers trapped on board the diamond princess, which she described as a "contaminated prison. "
"(my husband philip and i) are 75 and 77 years old, we have health risks and we are a bad category to get sick .
.
.
we are not safe in our rooms," she said.
in an attempt to escape the infection, courter said she had contacted her insurance company, medjet, which is willing to send a crisis extraction team from the boat to evacuate her.
the us and japanese governments, however, won't allow that to happen.
japanese health officials told cnn that any passengers of the diamond princess had to go through the quarantine process before they were allowed onto land and that the process was ongoing.
"we can be taken in quarantine, and extracted in quarantine and arrive in the united states safely," she said.
"we are not sick at the moment but there is a major concern that circulating air on this ship can make people sick. "
courter said the us government could take them to the nearby okinawa military base for evacuation, telling president donald trump that he could have another thousand us coronavirus cases on his hands if the ship wasn't emptied.
"this was a trip of a lifetime, and i used all of my credit card points.
the way out was divine but right now i do not mind how i go home," she said.
courter is afraid that if she becomes infected she may not survive.
older people are especially susceptible to the wuhan coronavirus -- china's national health commission said tuesday that 80% of all fatalities in mainland china were over the age of 60.
"i (just) do not want to go home in a box," she said.
nightmare on board the westerdam the westerdam cruise liner left singapore on january 16 for what should have been a 30-day cruise around asia.
but after leaving hong kong on february 1, the ship has been turned away from the philippines due to fears that there may be coronavirus cases on board.
there is no suggestion that any passengers, current or former, have been infected.
australian passenger david holst, 63, who is traveling on the westerdam with his wife judy, said that the ship had briefly docked in kaohsiung, taiwan.
but on february 6, taiwan announced it would no longer allow international cruise ships to dock in its ports due to fears around the epidemic.
the westerdam left kaohsiung and was turned away from taipei as well.
the ship, which is operated by holland america, had been set to stop at five ports in japan, but on thursday the japanese government said that it would not allow the westerdam to call anywhere in their territory.
"no one wants us," holst told cnn from the cruise ship, which is currently sailing through the east china sea.
"holland america said they're in discussions with the us state department, the us navy, and the dutch government to try and find a solution.
i have no idea what that will be or when that would be. "
holst said he and his wife had spent more than $20,000 on the trip, including flights.
but he said the past six or seven days had been a "nightmare. "
"it keeps getting worse and everyone on board is just living in fear that the bell is going to ring and the captain is going to say, 'return to your cabins, we're in quarantine and we've got a virus case on board,'" he said.
in a statement, holland america said it understood that guests on board are concerned and it was doing everything it could to protect their health.
"we have implemented a significant number of measures.
our medical experts have been coordinating closely with global health authorities to implement enhanced screening, prevention and control measures for our ships," the statement said.
"we have no reason to believe there are cases of coronavirus on board. "
the company added that all guests would receive a full refund of their cruise fare plus a future cruise credit of 100% of their cruise fare.
holst criticized the ship for stopping in at hong kong and taking on new passengers there, despite the chinese territory having coronavirus cases.
"people are angry, i think the tension is rising and everyone on this boat for the last seven days has lived under the dark shadow of wondering whether we have the virus on board," he said.
in its statement, holland america said it had followed us centers for disease and control guidelines at the time the ship docked in hong kong on february 1.  trapped in hong kong in hong kong, the 3,600 people aboard the world dream cruise liner have been under quarantine for three days after a number of passengers from a former voyage tested positive for the coronavirus.
three crew members have been evacuated from the ship for treatment in hospital.
chuang shuk-kwan of the hong kong department of health said that all passengers would have to remain on board until "we complete the quarantine work. "
chuang said 33 crew members had shown symptoms of illness at varying degrees, although most had tested negative for the coronavirus.
before arriving in hong kong, the world dream had docked at several ports across china and vietnam.
on january 24, after visiting those locations, more than 4,400 passengers disembarked mostly to return to mainland china.
not long after, eight of those former passengers were confirmed to be infected with the coronavirus, potentially leaving the ship contaminated.
dream cruises has said it is attempting to contact passengers who had previously been on board the world dream "to inform them of the situation and seek professional health assistance. "
there is no word yet when the world dream may be allowed to leave hong kong.
when my plane finally touched down in sydney, i was overwhelmed by a sense of disbelief.
after learning two of my family members had become seriously ill, i spent over six months planning what seemed like an impossible journey from europe home to australia.
a series of flight cancellations and hours spent reading horror stories from stranded citizens abroad who had lost jobs, visas and homes while waiting for a flight had left me convinced i would never make it.
taking advantage of its geographic isolation, australia closed its borders to international travelers early in the pandemic and barred most citizens from leaving.
under the current restrictions, only passport holders, permanent residents and those coming in on business or study exemptions are permitted to enter.
a hotel quarantine scheme run by state governments has been in place since march 2020, and it is widely regarded as playing a key role in australia's successful containment of covid-19.
crucially, australia's hotel quarantine system is also supported by a strictly enforced cap on weekly international arrivals.
the arrival caps, which currently allow 6,362 arrivals nationally per week, have created a bottleneck of stranded australians forced to compete for a limited number of seats.
in order to make flights commercially viable, airlines prioritize selling business and first-class tickets at a premium, and some passengers have reportedly paid upwards of $20,000 aud (roughly $16,000 usd) for a one-way business class ticket to fly into sydney from various european cities.
nearly 40,000 australians are still trying to return according to the department of foreign affairs and trade (dfat).
due to the cap on arrivals, i was one of just three people to secure an economy class seat on my flight from zurich to singapore, and one of a dozen or so to make it onward to sydney.
luck of the draw it doesn't matter if you flew first class, or economy like i did.
money and circumstance play almost no role in determining which hotel travelers will be assigned to.
everyone must pay $3,000 aud, (roughly $2,330 usd) per room, with an additional charge of $1,000 aud (roughly $775 usd) for every extra person, and $500 aud (roughly $390 usd) per child.
food is included in the quarantine fee, with passengers receiving three meals per day to their hotel room door.
whether you end up in a lavish suite with gourmet meals and harbor views, or a cramped, windowless room with inedible fare, all comes down to luck.
on arrival into sydney my flight was greeted by members of the state police, army, navy and air force, before everyone was loaded onto a bus without open windows.
after approximately an hour of waiting onboard, we drove off into the night, but were not told our final destination.
every passenger on my flight ended up quarantining at the sheraton grand hyde park sydney, a very comfortable five-star hotel offering city views.
like most urban hotels though, my room -- while luxurious -- did not have opening windows or a balcony, which meant i couldn't access fresh air for 14 days.
in recent months, breaches in australia's quarantine system in sydney, melbourne, brisbane, adelaide and perth have occurred, leading to a spate of infections among hotel staff, cleaners and security guards.
these have raised concerns over the lack of ventilation within city hotels, and the heightened risk that poses in terms of aerosol transmission.
in early february, there were two incidents of guest-to-guest transmission in hotels, after a woman in melbourne reportedly contracted the virus from a family located in a room across the hotel hallway, and in a separate incident, a traveler in sydney tested positive two days after leaving quarantine, indicating that he likely caught the virus during the final days of his stay, rather than it being a rare late-blooming infection.
considering these recent outbreaks, and how highly transmissible new strains entering the country, such as the b.
1.
1.
7 variant are, access to fresh air was the only thing i had hoped for in my hotel assignment.
when i asked guest services at the sheraton about the possibility of moving to a room with balcony access, i was advised it would cost an extra $400 aud per night to upgrade.
speaking with several other travelers who have gone through the quarantine system in sydney, i learned that charging a premium for rooms with access to fresh air was common practice among hotels, as a way to increase profit margins.
i contacted the marriott international, which owns the sheraton grand hotel, to ask about this practice, but received no response.
despite the lack of fresh air, my overall experience in quarantine was relatively positive.
the staff were kind, the room was comfortable and i was provided with a desk to work at.
other travelers i spoke to, however, were not as fortunate.
amelia seeto spent $28,500 aud (roughly $22,130 usd) on mandatory quarantine and flights for her family of four to get home to sydney from the uk.
despite traveling with two highly active toddlers, she says her and her husband were placed in a small room in sydney's mantra hotel, with no opening windows or a balcony.
"the system is flawed and unfair," she said.
"they put families in rooms that are substandard while the best rooms stay empty.
hotel management told me they had all these empty rooms on the top floors but we couldn't move there because everyone gets allocated to their floors. "
seeto says she tried to appeal to the new south wales police stationed at her hotel, who were in charge of approving any accommodation changes, to allow her family to move into a room with access to fresh air, but her requests were denied.
"i was in a room with no balcony and two screen-free little boys who needed fresh air.
the nurses appealed to the police to move us and their claim was rejected twice," seeto said via phone.
anastasia aubert also traveled to sydney with a family of four in february, but unlike seeto, she said her experience was "very positive," as her family were given a large apartment with two balconies at the meriton suites pitt street, which came with a full kitchen and laundry facilities.
the most common hotel quarantine complaints among other travelers i spoke with related to the lack of fresh air, suitable ventilation in rooms and the quality of the food being served.
anthony, who requested cnn only use his first name, quarantined at the novotel sydney central in december after flying to australia from new york.
he said via email that his hotel room was visibly dirty on arrival, and that the ventilation was so poor he had trouble breathing.
"the air conditioning unit in my room had no fresh air provision, i looked into the ceiling and saw no ductwork connected.
i took out the filter and it was caked with dirt.
the condition of my room was unsanitary with urine on the toilet.
i had to clean the toilet and the air filter myself. "
anthony says he requested to be moved to a room with an operable window or balcony after experiencing tightness in his chest from the lack of ventilation, and eventually his request was approved.
he was so disturbed by his overall experience though, that he says he wrote to australia's minister for health, greg hunt, and the new south wales ombudsman -- the state's watchdog tasked with addressing problems in government agencies -- to lodge a formal complaint.
"the conditions of the hotel rooms do not comply with minimum international standards for detainees -- even prisoners get fresh air," anthony wrote in his letter, citing section 11(a) of the united nations standard minimum rules for the treatment of prisoners, which stipulates that prison windows "shall be large enough to enable the prisoners to read or work by natural light, and constructed so they can allow the entrance of fresh air whether or not there is artificial ventilation. "
the new south wales ombudsman was unable to investigate anthony's complaint however, as while the quarantine system is run by the state government, the ombudsman has no authority to investigate private businesses that are involved in running it.
cnn has reached out to novotel owner accor for a response to his claims.
professor jason monty, head of melbourne university's mechanical engineering department, has spent months analyzing airflow systems across medical wards in victoria, and is considered a leader in the study of how poor ventilation can influence aerosolized transmission of covid-19 particles.
monty said that from an infection-control standpoint, the ventilation in most city hotels is extremely poor, and that state governments should start investing in open-air quarantine facilities, such as the howard springs facility in the northern territory, which is a former gas plant workers' village now being used to house those returning from overseas.
"hotels often have what's called positive pressure in their rooms, which means air is trying to get out because the ventilation system is weak," he said.
"that air usually has two ways out: either through the door or through a window.
if you close the windows it only has one way out and that's through the door.
"it's a gap in the system that we've been pushing pretty hard for the government to respond to since, june-july 2020," he added, referencing the recent cluster outbreaks in several hotel quarantine settings.
how other countries compare many countries have implemented enforced mandatory quarantine or self-isolation upon arrival since early on in the pandemic, however some are far stricter than others.
in south korea, travelers are required to self-quarantine for 14 days, but can do so in a private setting as long as it is deemed suitable by state authorities.
those who fail to organize appropriate accommodation are put into government-run facilities at their own expense.
hong kong tightened its already strict quarantine measures in december 2020.  incoming residents must now book a room and board for 21 days at one of 36 pre-approved hotels chosen by the government, one of the strictest quarantine measures in the world.
travelers are able to select an accommodation based on their budget/room preferences.
thailand, which has recently re-opened its borders to tourists willing to quarantine for 14 days, provides a long list of government-approved quarantine hotels that guests can stay in at their own expense.
the approved options are accessed via an online portal, and travelers can search for hotels based on budget, location, size and available in-house facilities.
all travelers -- including british citizens -- who arrive in england from "high-risk" coronavirus countries now have to quarantine in hotels for up to 10 days, but supervised departures from the rooms are permitted for fresh air.
like thailand, the uk government offers a list of approved options, however the cost of the hotel
wearing a striped shirt and matrix-style dark glasses, onel de guzman stared at the floor as he made his way through a crowd of photographers into a hastily arranged press conference in quezon city, a suburb of the philippines capital manila.
skinny, with a mop of black hair falling to his eyebrows, he appeared to barely register the journalists' shouted questions, his only movement the occasional dabbing of sweat from his face with a white towel.
seated to his right, de guzman's lawyer rolando quimbo had to lean in close to hear the 23-year-old's mumbled response, which he then repeated in english for the waiting press.
"he is not really aware that the acts imputed to him were indeed done by him," the lawyer said.
"so if you ask me whether or not he was aware of the consequences i would say that he is not aware. "
it was may 11, 2000, and if de guzman was feeling shell-shocked, he had good reason to be.
he was accused of authoring and releasing the first truly global computer virus that had disrupted the operations of businesses and government agencies the world over, from ford and merrill lynch to the pentagon and the british parliament, and was on track to cause a estimated $10 billion in damages — all in the name of love.
twenty years on, the iloveyou virus remains one of the farthest reaching ever.
tens of millions of computers around the world were affected.
the fight to contain the malware and track down its author was front page news globally, waking up a largely complacent public to the dangers posed by malicious cyber actors.
it also exposed vulnerabilities which we are still dealing with to this day, despite two decades of advances in computer security and technology.
this account of the virus is based on interviews with law enforcement and investigators involved in the original case, contemporaneous cnn reporting and reports by the fbi, philippines police and the pentagon.
multiple attempts to reach onel de guzman for this article, including through his family and former lawyer, were unsuccessful.
de guzman had not commented publicly since around 2000, until this week when author geoff white tracked him down to the phone repair shop he now runs in manila, where he admitted to authoring the virus.
lovestruck on the afternoon of may 4, 2000, michael gazeley was in his office at star computer city, a warren of it companies and shops selling electronics and gadgets overlooking hong kong's victoria harbor.
a few months earlier, gazeley and his longtime business partner, mark webb-johnson, founded their own information security firm, network box, which specialized in protecting customers from online threats.
both men had decades of experience in the industry, and had just finished the grueling (though occasionally lucrative) work of preparing for the new millennium by staving off the y2k bug that threatened to cause widespread damage to systems worldwide.
though largely remembered today, much to the chagrin of those involved, as an overreaction — or worse, a hoax — the y2k bug was real, and the potential costs massive.
they were avoided thanks to the diligent efforts of programmers around the world working together.
it was a sign of the new connectivity that the internet, still in its relative infancy, was fostering.
that connectivity cut both ways, however, as gazeley was reminded of that afternoon.
all the phones in his office started ringing at once.
first were his clients, then came non-customers, all calling frantically in the hope that network box could help stop a virus that was screaming through their systems, destroying and corrupting data as it went.
they all told the same story: someone in the office had received an email with the subject "iloveyou" and the message, "kindly check the attached loveletter coming from me. "
when they opened what appeared to be a text file — actually an executable program masquerading as one — the virus quickly took control, sending copies of itself to everyone in their email address book.
those recipients, thinking the email was either some weird joke or a serious declaration of love, opened the attachment in turn, spreading it even further.
office email servers were soon clogged as thousands of love letters went back and forth, disseminating the virus to more people.
it turned out to be much worse than just a self-propelling chain letter.
at the same time as it was replicating itself, the iloveyou virus destroyed much of the victim's hard drive, renaming and deleting thousands of files.
many of the increasingly panicked callers gazeley was fielding inquiries from did not have backups, and he had the awkward job of explaining to them that many of their files — everything from spreadsheets and financial records to photos and mp3s — were likely lost for good.
"this wasn't something that people were used to as a concept, they didn't realize that email could be so dangerous," said gazeley, recounting the first calls.
the entire concept of the internet was still relatively new in 2000.  according to statistics from the international telecommunications union (itu), a united nations body, just 28% of hong kongers had access to the internet at that time, along with 27% of the united  kingdom, and 15% of france.
even in the united states, where the technology was invented, only some 43% of americans were getting online.
two years earlier, hollywood star meg ryan asked "is it infidelity if you're involved with somebody on email?"
as the movie "you've got mail" introduced people to the idea of cyber-romance — and that email could be used for something other than boring office work.
computer chaos from hong kong, where the virus crippled the communications and ravaged file systems of investment banks, public relations firms and the dow jones newswire, the love bug spread westward as the may 4 workday started.
graham cluley was on stage at a security conference in stockholm, sweden, when the virus hit europe.
he had just finished describing an unrelated virus which targeted a now-defunct operating system, hijacking users' accounts to broadcast messages to their coworkers, including "friday i'm in love. "
this, cluley cracked, was likely to cause severe embarrassment for most people, but could potentially lead to some office romance.
as the conference broke for coffee, attendees' mobile phones and pagers began going off wildly.
several guests approached cluley, asking if the virus he'd described was spread via email.
he assured them it wasn't — and, anyway, it was limited to a niche system that most people didn't use.
"they said, well, that's weird because we're suddenly getting loads of emails with the subject line 'i love you,'" cluley said in an interview from his home in the united kingdom.
when cluley turned on his own phone, he was bombarded with notifications of missed calls, voice mails and text messages.
back home, cluley's employer, the anti-virus firm sophos, had been getting "absolutely hammered" with phone calls from clients begging for help and journalists trying to understand what the hell was going on.
cluley raced to the airport to catch a flight to london, and even traded phone batteries with a generous taxi driver as the constant stream of messages drained his nokia cellphone of power.
when he landed in the united kingdom, a car was waiting to whisk him to a tv studio to discuss what had by now become one of the biggest tech stories in the world.
in five hours, iloveyou spread across asia, europe and north america, some 15 times faster than the melissa virus did when it struck a year before, infecting over 1 million computers.
soon after starting business on may 4, the united kingdom's house of commons had to take its overloaded email servers offline, as did the ford motor company and even microsoft, whose outlook software was the primary means of spreading the virus.
at the time, windows controlled more than 95% of the personal computer market, and outlook came bundled with microsoft office, then all-but-required for doing business on a computer.
for most people, outlook was email.
unlike today, when many email services are run via centralized servers — think outlook.
com or gmail — companies in 2000 were running email off the same servers on which they hosted their website.
this could be janky, slow and startling insecure.
back then, cluley said, "many companies didn't have in place filters their email gateways to try and stop spam, let alone viruses. "
even though the united states had advance warning, the virus spread just as quickly there — as almost everyone seemed apparently unable to resist opening the "love letter. "
within the pentagon, there was consternation as the virus hit the united states army forces command (forscom) mailing list, with 50,000 subscribers.
from there, almost every major military base in the country — barring a handful that didn't use outlook — watched as their email services were crippled and forced offline for hours as the problem was fixed.
searching for the culprit across the potomac river, at the fbi's washington, dc, headquarters, michael vatis was scrambling to get a handle on the crisis.
as director of the national infrastructure protection center (nipc), a relatively new intergovernmental agency tasked with tackling cyber threats, vatis was awoken early may 4 with news of the iloveyou virus hitting the united states.
the nipc soon sent out an alert warning of a "new, in-the-wild worm virus identified as loveletter or lovebug [that] is being propagated globally via e-mail," but it came too late to prevent much of the us government and military, as well as dozens of private companies, from being affected.
as anti-virus companies slowly began rolling out patches, stemming the damage and enabling companies to come back online, attention within the fbi turned to tracking down those responsible.
the investigation was led by the new york field office, which soon found evidence pointing back east, beyond hong kong, to the philippines.
"in a very short period of time, we ended up identifying individuals in the philippines and seeking the assistance of philippine law enforcement," said vatis, now a partner at the new york law firm steptoe.
"and a very short time after that, the philippine authorities ultimately made an arrest. "
both the technical fix and first break in the case came so fast because, for all its rapid dissemination around the world, the iloveyou virus was clumsily coded and startlingly unsophisticated.
it mashed together several existing pieces of malware and did little to hide its workings.
"every single victim of the love bug got a copy of the love bug's code, the actual source code," said cluley, the sophos analyst.
"so it was simple to write an antidote.
it was no more complex than any of the other thousands and thousands of viruses we'd seen that day.
but of course, this one was partic
