Hong Kong announces new border closures, as China's coronavirus death toll overtakes SARS.
china has reported no new locally transmitted coronavirus cases for the first time since the pandemic began, marking a major turning point in the global battle to contain covid-19.
at a news conference on thursday morning, officials from china's national health commission announced there had been just 34 new cases in the past 24 hours -- all imported from overseas -- and eight new deaths, all in hubei, the province where the virus was first identified.
there were there no new reported cases in hubei at all on wednesday.
the milestone will likely be held up as proof of the ongoing success of china's sweeping, top-down efforts to control the virus, despite persistent allegations that local officials mishandled the initial outbreak.
just last month, mainland china was reporting thousands of new cases every day, and was considered the most high-risk infection area in the world.
in the weeks following the early spread of the virus, the government enacted draconian quarantine measures and strict travel restrictions affecting hundreds of millions of citizens.
in some hard-hit cities, residents have been unable to leave their apartments for more than a month, while transport between major population hubs has been limited or halted altogether.
the unprecedented nature of the measures has exacted a steep toll, however, both on the many millions of ordinary chinese forced to endure life under lockdown and the country's economy, which has seen a steep decline in recent weeks.
beyond china as the danger has lessened in china, the global infection rate continues to accelerate, with countries across multiple continents now grappling with fast-expanding outbreaks of their own.
as of thursday afternoon, the virus had infected more than 218,800 people worldwide, according to johns hopkins university, which is tracking cases reported by the world health organization and additional sources.
that's more than double the total two weeks ago.
in response to the outbreak, democratic countries including italy, france and the philippines have enacted policies similar to those seen in china, placing millions under under full or partial lockdowns.
in response to the global crisis and with the outbreak at home increasingly under control, beijing has begun to send assistance and supplies overseas to countries heavily-affected by the pandemic.
on wednesday, the french foreign ministry announced it had received about a million face masks from the chinese government.
medical teams and supplies from china have also been sent to italy, which has already seen nearly 3,000 deaths from the virus.
at the same time, in light of the spreading virus globally, the chinese government is now rapidly escalating quarantine measures on international arrivals to avoid further outbreaks.
the beijing municipal government announced in state media thursday that all passengers arriving from overseas will need to go into "collective quarantine at designated facilities. "
beijing residents were previously allowed to quarantine themselves in their own homes.
in the semi-autonomous chinese city of hong kong, dozens of new cases have been confirmed in the past few days as returnees from europe and the us create a second wave of infections.
on tuesday, the city's government issued a red notice for all foreign countries, requiring anyone arriving from overseas to undergo a 14-day home quarantine.
the newly-imported cases come at a bad time for the chinese government as it attempts to restart the country's economy.
new economic data released on monday showed the chinese economy was hit severely by the coronavirus outbreak, with retail sales plunging 20.
5% compared to a year earlier, according to the national bureau of statistics.
at the same time, industrial output also fell 13.
5% during the same period, while fixed asset investment plunged 24.
5%.
our live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic has moved here.
extremely vulnerable people who have been "shielding" in great britain — staying at home at all times and avoiding any face-to-face contact — will be allowed outdoors from monday, the uk government said in a statement ahead of the official announcement on sunday.
communities secretary robert jenrick will announce that 2.
2 million clinically extremely vulnerable people will be able to go outside with members of their household, while continuing to follow social distancing guidelines, according to the government statement.
the updated guidance says those who live alone can meet outside with one other person from another household.
this is seen as a boon for the most clinically vulnerable, including many who have not had any face-to-face contact since they were first advised to shield 10 weeks ago.
however, it comes at a time when members of the scientific advisory board to the uk government – sage – are warning that a premature easing of the coronavirus lockdown could lead to a "significant" number of new cases and deaths across the country.
london mayor sadiq khan also on saturday urged citizens to "act with caution" as the government prepares to relax lockdown measures on monday, expressing his concerns that the country is "rushing" to ease restrictions.
however, the government advised those shielding: "the average chance of catching the virus is now down from 1/40 to 1/1000, delivering greater reassurance that it is safe to cautiously reflect this in the guidance for those who have been advised to shield. "
it added that people who are shielding should remain at a two-meter distance from others when outside, should only leave the house once a day and should not go to work or the shops.
they should also avoid crowded places where they can't social distance.
"i want to thank everyone who has followed the shielding guidance – it is because of your patience and sacrifice that thousands of lives have been saved," prime minister boris johnson said.
"i do not underestimate just how difficult it has been for you, staying at home for the last 10 weeks, and i want to pay tribute to your resilience. "
johnson thanked those who have helped deliver medicine and shopping or checked in on people who are isolating.
"we have been looking at how we can make life easier for our most vulnerable, so .
.
.
i am happy to confirm that those who are shielding will be able to spend time outside with someone else, observing social distance guidelines," johnson said.
"i will do what i can, in line with the scientific advice, to continue making life easier for you over the coming weeks and months. "
"thanks to the sacrifices made across the country, which have protected the nhs and saved lives, it's now time to begin lifting restrictions, step by step, and while we must all stay alert, we can now start to resume a sense of normality," health secretary matt hancock said.
during his speech at the government's daily press conference on sunday, jenrick is expected to set out a plan to review shielding guidance at the same time as the government reviews its social distancing measures.
the next review will take place later this month.
##the future## the number of confirmed covid-19 cases in peru rose to 155,671 on saturday, a jump of 7,386 from the previous day, according to the country's health ministry.
the country reported 141 new coronavirus-related deaths, taking the national death toll to 4,371, according to the ministry.
peru has the second-highest number of confirmed covid-19 cases in latin america, behind brazil.
##cases## new york gov.
andrew cuomo has signed a bill that gives death benefits to families of frontline workers who died battling the coronavirus pandemic.
"it is the least we can do to say thank you, and we honor you, and we remember you.
you gave your lives for us.
we will be there to support your families going forward," cuomo said at a news conference on saturday.
"we grieve for your loss, and we will always be there for you the way you were there for us.
thank you," the governor added.
at least five regions in upstate new york have entered phase two as of friday, gov.
andrew cuomo said during his covid-19 news briefing saturday.
next week, the capital region and western new york will end 14 days of being in phase one and will have to make a decision if they will move to phase two of the reopening, the governor said.
"we made that decision by reviewing the data and the numbers," cuomo said.
new york city mayor bill de blasio was asked to what extent he expects a rise in covid-19 cases as a result of the demonstrations and large gatherings around the city.
"i would still wish that everyone would realize that when people gather it's inherently dangerous in the context of this pandemic and i'm going to keep urging people not to use that approach and if they do they focus on social distancing and wearing face coverings," de blasio said in a news briefing today.
de blasio said "you cannot see overt racism, you cannot see overt racist murder and not feel something profoundly deep, so i understand that. "
"but the last thing we would want to see is members of our community harmed because the virus spread in one of these settings," de blasio said.
"it's a very very complicated reality. "
##cases## at least 67 people in new york state have died from coronavirus on friday – the same number as the day before.
"overall, that has been tremendous, tremendous progress from where we were," gov.
andrew cuomo said at a news conference on saturday.
the number of total hospitalizations, new hospitalizations and intubations have all decreased, cuomo said.
"that is all good news," he said.
##new york## ##cases## the number of coronavirus patients hospitalized in france continues to decline, according to figures released by the french health ministry on saturday.
there are currently 14,380 hospital patients with the virus, a decrease of 315 from friday, the ministry said.
the statement said the number of covid-19 hospital deaths has risen by 57 from friday.
france has reported 28,717 coronavirus-related deaths in total, according to a tally from johns hopkins university.
##cases## at least 215 people died from coronavirus in the united kingdom in the past 24 hours, bringing the death toll to approximately 38,376, according to uk culture secretary oliver dowden.
dowden, speaking at the daily downing street press conference on saturday, said roughly 127,722 tests were carried out on friday.
##cases## the centers for disease control and prevention will resume its regular briefings as the administration continues its coronavirus response, cnn has learned.
the cdc held a briefing friday in which director robert redfield said the agency was "never blind" to the early spread of the coronavirus in the united states.
that session was the first of the resumption of the regular press briefings, a senior health and human services official told cnn.
some context: the last of the regular briefings was on march 9.  that is a short time after a top cdc official, dr.  nancy messonier, the agency's director of the national center for immunization and respiratory diseases, surprised the trump administration by predicting the coronavirus would be spreading more rapidly at a time when the white house was downplaying the seriousness of it.
her comments sent the stock market tumbling and in turn, angered president trump.
the move comes as the white house has been under fire recently for sidelining the administration's health experts on its own coronavirus task force.
the doctors, including deborah birx and anthony fauci, have appeared less and less as the country begins to reopen, despite fears of a potential resurgence.
the spanish government said saturday that it would further relax coronavirus restrictions in certain areas from monday.
four islands will lead the way by embarking on phase 3 of the government's de-escalation plan, the government said.
they are la gomera, el hierro and la graciosa, in the canaries, and formentera, in the balearic islands -- all well-known tourist destinations in spain.
phase 3 seeks to allow a transition into relatively normal activities, including attending cinemas, theaters, restaurants and circuses, as long as establishments limit capacity.
people may sit by the bar and there won't be time restrictions by age group any more.
however, most of the islands in both archipelagos will remain on phase 2, together with 70% of mainland spain, which is expected to remain on phase 2 until june 8.   some relaxation of measures was announced saturday for those regions under phase 2: indoor sporting venues are allowed to open at very limited capacity with rigorous hygiene protocols.
swimming pools may open at very limited capacity, with a two-meter requirement between swimmers.
the government also offered some respite for a number of regions still under phase 1, including capital city madrid.
residents will be allowed visits to parks and restricted indoor sports activities.
open-air terraces are also allowed to reopen but not at full capacity.
london mayor sadiq khan has urged citizens to "act with caution" as the uk government prepares to ease lockdown measures on monday.
"i am deeply concerned we are now rushing too fast to lift lockdown measures," khan tweeted saturday.
"the joint biosecurity centre has said we're not ready to move from level 4 to 3, and the 5 tests are not met.
i urge londoners to act with caution -- lives depend on it," he said.
earlier on saturday, members of the scientific advisory board to the uk government -- sage -- warned that a premature easing of the coronavirus lockdown could lead to a "significant" number of new cases and deaths across the country.
speaking to sky news on saturday, sage adviser and epidemiologist professor john edmunds said that the easing of the lockdown would be "risky" and warned that a relaxation of containment measures could lead to some 8,000 new cases of coronavirus every day.
"significant numbers of cases, unfortunately, means we will get deaths," he said.
##lockdowns#   german chancellor angela merkel "cannot confirm" that she will attend a possible g7 summit of world leaders in washington amid the coronavirus pandemic, a spokesperson at the chancellery said saturday.
us president donald trump has said the summit could be held in washington in late june.
"the chancellor thanks president trump for his invitation to the g7 summit in washington at the end of june," merkel's spokesperson said in a statement.
"as of today, given the overall pandemic situation, she cannot confirm her personal participation, that is, a trip to washington," the spokesperson added.
meanwhile, germany's health minister, jens spahn, expressed his "disappointment" over the united states' withdrawal from the world health organization, saying that the decision taken by the trump administration was a "setback" for international health policy.
some context: canadian prime minister justin trudeau said on wednesday he could not yet commit to attending the proposed g7 meeting in person because of concerns over transmission of the virus and canada's quarantine rules.
french president emmanuel macron spoke with trump on thursday.
the two leaders "agreed on the importance of convening the g7 in person in the near future," according to a white house readout of the call.
but the white house did not say whether macron had committed to attending in person.
at least 102,836 people have died in the us from coronavirus, according to johns hopkins university, with at least 1,747,087 cases recorded across the country.
on saturday, johns hopkins reported 1,068 new cases and 27 reported deaths.
the totals include cases from all 50 states, the district of columbia and other us territories, as well as repatriated cases.
the us has the highest number of deaths and cases globally.
cnn is tracking covid-19's spread across the nation here.
##cases## for months, latin america watched the rest of the world suffer as the coronavirus spread.
it is a spectator no longer.
"this is the new epicenter," said dr.  marcos espinal, director of communicable diseases at the pan american health organization.
months after emerging from a relatively obscure chinese province, the eye of this viral storm has firmly landed in latin america.
there are roughly 920,000 confirmed coronavirus cases and nearly 50,000 deaths across the region's 33 countries, but those numbers are fast on the rise.
as new deaths and cases fall in the united states, europe and asia, latin america now stands as the world's sole region where the outbreak is unequivocally reaching new heights.
"in many ways this is no surprise," said dr.  ana diez roux, dean of drexel university's school of public health.
"it was predictable that this was going to happen. "
read the full story here.
japan's health ministry announced 75 new coronavirus cases and 12 deaths for friday -- the fourth consecutive day that the country has seen a rise in coronavirus cases since fully lifting its state of emergency.
this brings the number of total covid-19 cases in japan to 17,516 (16,804 on land and 712 from the diamond princess cruise ship), and its death toll stands at 899 (886 on land and 13 on the ship).
the southern city of kitakyushu reported 26 new infections on friday, where clusters of infection were traced to elderly care homes and hospitals.
the city has reported 69 new cases in the past week.
in tokyo, 22 new infections and three deaths were reported on friday, marking a clear upward trend.
prime minister shinzo abe lifted the state of emergency for all of japan on monday.
much of the country had already eased restrictions except for tokyo and four other prefectures.
two newly assigned us forces korea (usfk) service members tested positive for covid-19 upon their arrival in south korea from the united states on a us government-chartered flight, usfk said in a statement.
the pair arrived at osan air base on may 27, and were in mandatory quarantine at camp humphreys' dedicated barracks while awaiting the results of their covid-19 tests.
the soldiers are being treated in the isolation barracks at camp humphreys, which is designated for confirmed covid-19 cases.
a troop of monkeys snatched the blood samples of suspected coronavirus patients at a government hospital in the meerut district of the north indian state of uttar pradesh.
the incident happened on thursday when a lab assistant working with the hospital's covid-19 facility was carrying samples due for testing, dr dheeraj baliyan, medical superintendent of lala lajpat rai memorial medical college and hospital, told cnn.
the monkeys attacked the lab assistant and stole a box containing three samples, baliyan added.
s. k.  garg, head of the hospital, told a local newswire that the samples were blood samples, and not the swabs usually taken to test for covid-19.
garg said the samples belonged to people who had tested positive for covid-19, but were taken as part of routine blood tests for the patients.
the monkeys climbed the trees with the samples and threw them after chewing the packets, baliyan added.
read more here:  a person who partied in the lake of the ozarks, missouri, area on memorial day weekend has tested positive for coronavirus -- and was possibly infectious over the holiday.
the boone county resident visited multiple bars on may 24 and 25, according to the camden county health department.
they "developed (the) illness" on sunday, may 24, and was possibly infectious before then.
video from that weekend shows people crowded in a pool at backwater jacks bar and grill in osage beach on saturday, according to scott pasmore, an anchor for cnn affiliate ktvk, who shot the footage.
the partier went to backwater jacks between about 1 p. m.  and 5 p. m.  local time and again shortly before 10 p. m. , according to health officials.
the person -- who was not identified -- also went to shady gators and lazy gators and buffalo wild wings, officials added.
a 5-4 supreme court ruling has rejected a request from a california church to block limitations on the number of people who could attend religious services during the coronavirus pandemic.
chief justice john roberts sided with the liberals on the bench, and wrote separately to explain his vote.
"although california's guidelines place restrictions on places of worship, those restrictions appear consistent with the free exercise clause of the first amendment," roberts wrote.
"similar or more severe restrictions apply to comparable secular gatherings, including lectures, concerts, movie showings, spectator sports, and theatrical performances, where large groups of people gather in close proximity for extended periods of time. "
the thrust to reopen churches has become one of the latest debates in the coronavirus culture wars.
as states across the country have been gradually reopening their cities, some churches have argued that they are being treated differently than other businesses or groups.
justices clarence thomas, samuel alito, neil gorsuch and brett kavanaugh would have granted the church's request.
kavanaugh, writing for thomas and gorsuch, said the church would suffer "irreparable harm from not being able to hold services on pentecost sunday in a way that comparable secular businesses and persons can conduct their activities. "
wuhan was the original epicenter.
then the coronavirus migrated to europe.
new york was the next hotspot, and now world health authorities are worried about south america.
the region as a whole is reporting more daily cases than the united states.
and politics, rather than policy, seems to have informed the very different approaches that various south american countries have taken -- with ideology appearing to have trumped best medical practices in some cases.
in mexico, president andrés manuel lópez obrador says he will resume travel around the country to kick off important public works projects, including a new railway in the southeast.
in brazil, president jair bolsonaro defied his country's own medical authorities by participating in multiple rallies supporting his government.
the right-wing former military officer was even shaking hands with supporters and holding children in his arms.
and in nicaragua, president daniel ortega has turned the coronavirus pandemic into a political issue, saying his opponents are the ones who want people to stay home to create a financial crisis, undermining the country and his government.
read more here: there are now at least 1,746,019 cases of coronavirus in the us, according to johns hopkins university's tally, with 102,809 total deaths.
on friday, johns hopkins university reported 24,266 new cases and 1,193 deaths.
the totals include cases from all 50 states, the district of columbia and other us territories, as well as repatriated cases.
when the world looked to asia for successful examples in handling the novel coronavirus outbreak, most eyes were on south korea, taiwan and hong kong.
but there's one overlooked success story -- vietnam.
the country of 97 million people is yet to report a single coronavirus-related death, and on saturday had just 328 confirmed cases, despite its long border with china and the millions of chinese visitors it receives each year.
this is all the more remarkable considering vietnam is a low-middle income country with a much less advanced health care system than others in the region.
it only has eight doctors for every 10,000 people, a third of the ratio in south korea, according to the world bank.
after a three-week nationwide lockdown, vietnam lifted social distancing rules in late april.
it hasn't reported any local infections for more than 40 days.
businesses and schools have reopened, and life is gradually returning to normal.
to skeptics, vietnam's official numbers may seem too good to be true.
but guy thwaites, an infectious disease doctor who works in one of the main hospitals designated by the vietnamese government to treat covid-19 patients, said the numbers matched the reality on the ground.
"i go to the wards every day, i know the cases, i know there has been no death," said thwaites, who also heads the oxford university clinical research unit in ho chi minh city.
read more here: us withdraws from the who: president donald trump announced that the us would pull out of the world health organization after criticizing its response to the coronavirus pandemic and relationship with china.
medical groups including the american academy of pediatrics warned the decision could endanger global health.
south america cases rise: brazil recorded its highest daily increase yet, with 26,928 new infections in 24 hours, while peru announced at least 6,500 new cases.
brazil's 27,878 coronavirus deaths are the fifth highest of any country, leapfrogging spain.
mexico's death toll nears 10,000: 371 more coronavirus deaths on friday has pushed mexico's total fatalities to 9,415.  there were 3,227 new confirmed infections over the same period, coming as the mexican government announced it would begin to reopen parts of its economy next week.
did pangolins incubate the coronavirus?
: a new study into the genetics of the novel coronavirus has shown the disease spent some time jumping between bats and pangolins before it first spread to humans.
but researchers said it still isn't clear which species was responsible for the first human infections, adding it could be third species.
mexico recorded 3,227 new coronavirus cases and 371 additional virus deaths on friday.
the country's death toll, now at 9,415, has roughly doubled in the last two weeks and remains the second-highest in latin america, behind brazil.
mexico is likely to surpass 10,000 coronavirus deaths this weekend.
its total confirmed case count is now 84,627.    the government will start reopening limited sections of the economy in select parts of the country on monday.
a deep dive into the genetics of the novel coronavirus shows it seems to have spent some time infecting both bats and pangolins before it jumped into humans, researchers said friday.
pangolins, also known as scaly anteaters, are sold as food in china and have been a prime suspect as a possible source of the pandemic.
yet the researchers said it's too soon to blame pangolins for the pandemic and a third animal species may have played host to the virus before it spilled over to people.
what is clear is that the coronavirus has swapped genes repeatedly with similar strains infecting bats, pangolins and a possible third species, a team at duke university, los alamos national laboratory and elsewhere reported in the journal science advances.
what's also clear is that people need to reduce contact with wild animals that can transmit new infections, they concluded.
the team analyzed 43 complete genomes from three strains of coronaviruses that infect bats and pangolins and that resemble the new covid-19 virus.
"in our study, we demonstrated that indeed sars-cov-2 has a rich evolutionary history that included a reshuffling of genetic material between bat and pangolin coronavirus before it acquired its ability to jump to humans," said elena giorgi, a staff scientist at los alamos national laboratory who worked on the study.
but their findings may let pangolins off the hook.
"the currently sampled pangolin coronaviruses are too divergent from sars-cov-2 to be its recent progenitors," the researchers wrote.
combinations of antivirals, anti-inflammatories and other drugs will likely be needed to treat people with coronavirus, a team of us food and drug administration scientists said friday.
it might even be necessary to customize treatment patient by patient, the fda team said in a review of the treatments being tested against covid-19.
"as the results of clinical trials become available, it may become increasingly clear that there is likely no single magic bullet to resolve the disease but a combination of several interventions that target different key factors of covid-19 may well be required," fda drug researcher montserrat puig and colleagues wrote in a report published in frontiers of immunology.
"until vaccines and targeted drugs for covid-19 are available, there may be a need to intervene with personalized therapeutic approaches.
we are learning day after day, that patients may be affected by sars-cov-2 differently and that many factors influence the outcome of the disease. "
they reviewed 30 different drugs, including those designed to stop the virus from getting into cells, such as already-approved blood pressure drugs; drugs aimed at stopping the virus from replicating, such as the immune suppressors sirolimus and the antiparasitic drug ivermectin; drugs that control the immune system response, such as type 1 interferon; and drugs meant to block the overwrought inflammatory response to the virus, which include some rheumatoid arthritis drugs.
different drugs could help people at different stages of the disease.
early on, it could be enough to stop the virus from getting into cells and replicating itself, puig said.
in patients with more severe disease, it will be more important to intervene in the body's immune response to infection, which can include an overreaction known as the cytokine storm.
no drug is approved to specifically treat coronavirus infections, although the fda has given emergency use authorization to the antiviral drug remdesivir.
being sick with covid-19 around the time you undergo surgery has been linked with an increased risk of complications and death in a new study.
the study, published in the medical journal the lancet on friday, found that among patients who had surgery for various reasons this year and were also diagnosed with covid-19 around the same time, about a quarter died and half experienced complications relating to their lungs.
the study, conduced by an international team of researchers, included data on 969 patients who had surgery between january and march 31 at 235 different hospitals across 24 countries, and who also were diagnosed with covid-19 either before or after their surgery.
almost 24% of those patients died within a month after their surgery.
more than half experienced complications relating to their lungs.
the researchers noted that men 70 and older who had emergency or major elective surgery were found to be at a particularly high risk of death.
it's not clear why there seems to be an association between covid-19 and a risk of lung-related complications after surgery, the researchers said.
it might be important to be careful about who has surgery during the pandemic, they added.
"although the risks associated with covid-19 need to be carefully balanced against the risks of delaying surgery for every individual patient, our study suggests that the thresholds for surgery should be raised, compared to normal practice," aneel bhangu of the university of birmingham in the uk, who worked on the study, said in statement.
"medical teams should consider postponing non-critical procedures and promoting other treatment options, which may delay the need for surgery or sometimes avoid it altogether. "
brazil recorded 1,124 new coronavirus-related deaths in 24 hours, according to the country's health ministry, raising its overall death toll to 27,878.  the new fatalities pushed brazil's nationwide death toll past that of spain, which has reported 27,121 covid-19 deaths, according to johns hopkins university.
brazil also reported 26,928 fresh cases of the novel coronavirus, another record high for the country, bringing the nationwide total to 465,166.  friday is the fourth day in a row that brazil has recorded more than 1,000 deaths in a day.
washington gov.
jay inslee said the state's stay-at-home order will be allowed to expire on sunday.
"under this approach, counties will have more flexibility to demonstrate that they have the capability to stay on top of the virus," inslee said at a news conference friday.
the earliest coronavirus hotspots in the united states were in washington, but inslee said enough progress has been made to allow more activities.
"this does not mean, obviously, that we're returning to normal," inslee said.
"it means that, three months to the day after we declared a state of emergency, we're successfully moving forward. "
inslee said counties with few cases may be able to move into phase three soon, but the earliest date would be june 3.  nba commissioner adam silver and the league's board of governors are considering four possible scenarios to restart the suspended season.
espn's adrian wojnarowski and the athletic's shams charania are reporting that silver presented the options on friday that owners will need to decide on before approaching the players union.
both wojnarowski and charania, quoting unnamed sources, outlined four similar options: 16 teams head straight to the playoffs
20 teams play a world cup-like playoff tournament
22 total teams, with some having to play into a post-season tournament
all 30 teams return to finish a shortened 72-game regular season followed by playoffs espn's wojnarowski says the board of governors will vote on the proposals thursday.
charania said silver is targeting a july 31 restart date.
asked about the reports, the nba did not have a comment.
us president donald trump again claimed without evidence that the coronavirus is "going away" – and there may even be a cure on the horizon.
in response to geoff ballotti of wyndham hotels speaking about consumers feeling comfortable traveling again, the president repeated one of his favorite refrains throughout the coronavirus pandemic, saying that the virus is "going away. "
on the possibility of a cure, trump said "it won't be in the long distance. "
some background: many scientists around the world are frantically working on therapeutics, vaccines and potential treatments.
no one knows when, or even if, any of them will pan out – or when the virus will no longer be a threat, let alone "disappear. "
experts have also said that at the very least, the coronavirus will enter the mix of viruses that make people sick every year.
sea world will reopen on june 10, and walt disney world will begin the reopening process on july 11, according to correspondence from florida's department of business and professional regulation.
orange county mayor jerry demings submitted an endorsement to the state after both parks presented reopening plans to the orange county economic recovery task force wednesday.
taiwanese authorities have slapped a $3,500 fine on a man who broke quarantine regulations for just eight seconds.
the man, a migrant worker from the philippines, was quarantining in a hotel in kaohsiung city when he briefly stepped out of his room into the hallway, the city's department of health told taiwan's official central news agency (cna).
the man was caught on cctv by hotel staff, who contacted the department of health, cna reported.
the department fined him 100,000 taiwan dollars -- around $3,500.
under taiwan's quarantine rules people are not allowed to leave their rooms, no matter for how long.
people in quarantine should not think they won't be fined for leaving their hotel room, the department of health said, according to cna.
there are 56 quarantine hotels in kaohsiung city, with a total of around 3,000 rooms, the department told cna.
cnn has contacted the department for comment.
taiwan has been widely lauded for its approach to containing the covid-19 pandemic.
it has never had to enact strict lockdowns, nor did it resort to drastic restrictions on civil freedoms, like in mainland china.
instead, taiwan's response focused on speed.
taiwanese authorities began screening passengers on direct flights from wuhan, where the virus was first identified, on december 31, 2019 -- back when the virus was mostly the subject of rumors and limited reporting.
the government also invested in mass testing and quick and effective contact tracing.
the island of 23 million people has recorded just 716 coronavirus cases and seven deaths, according to data from johns hopkins university.
please click here to read more live updates on the coronavirus outbreak.
canadian officials have fielded 325 requests for departure assistance from hubei province in china due to the coronavirus, global affairs canada said sunday in a statement.
canada is attempting to charter a plane to take canadians from wuhan, china, back to canada, the statement said.
hubei is the epicenter of the outbreak there are currently 543 canadians in hubei who have registered with the voluntary registration of canadians abroad service.
there are currently 15,219 canadians in china (including hong kong) who have registered with the voluntary service.
since registration is voluntary, this number is not a complete picture of canadians in the region or in china, the statement said.
only canadian citizens who have entered china with a canadian passport will be allowed to board the plane back to canada, global affairs canada said.
canadian citizens will need to have a valid canadian passport and a valid chinese visa to board the plane.
canadians who appear to have symptoms will not be able to board, according to global affairs canada.
the total number of confirmed wuhan coronavirus cases in mainland china stands at 17,205, the country's national health commission said sunday,  that figure is up 2,829 from the previous day.
the death toll globally is 362.  all but one of those deaths have occurred in mainland china.
doctors in thailand say they have successfully treated one wuhan coronavirus patient with a combination of antiviral drugs, according to a briefing on sunday from the ministry of health.
dr. kriangsak atipornwanich, a doctor at rajavithi hospital in bangkok, said he treated a 71-year-old female patient from china with a combination of drugs used in hiv and flu treatments.
he said the patient had previously been treated with only anti-hiv drugs.
"i had treated a patient with severe condition, and the result has been very satisfactory.
the patient's condition has improved very quickly within 48 hours.
and the test result has also changed from being positive into negative within 48 hours as well," atipornwanich said.
officials at the press conference said the latest lab test has showed there's no trace of the virus in the patient's respiratory system.
dr.  anthony fauci, director of the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases at the us national institutes of health, told cnn last week there are currently no proven effective drugs to treat the virus.
hospitals in beijing have reported using the same drugs given to hiv and aids patients are part of treatment for the wuhan coronavirus, though it is unclear if they have been successful.
correction: this post has been updated to accurately reflect the number of patients successfully treated the hubei health authority reported that 56 people died of the coronavirus on sunday, raising the death toll since the beginning of the outbreak to 361.   authorities confirmed an additional 2,103 cases of the virus in hubei, according to the health authority, which brings the total number of cases to over 16,600.  the health authority said 9,618 patients have been hospitalized, including 478 who are in critical condition.
russia is suspending all international rail services between russia and china, including those operated by chinese rail companies, russian railways said sunday.
unused tickets for cancelled trains booked and issued at russian points of sale can be returned without incurring any charges or fees, the company's statement said.
there are now nine cases of the novel coronavirus in the united states.
there are four confirmed cases in california; one case each in massachusetts, washington state and arizona and two in illinois.
the second case in illinois is the only instance so far of person-to-person transmission in the united states, state health officials said.
confirmed cases by state: nine confirmed cases as of sunday, february 2.   arizona – 1 california – 4 illinois – 2 massachusetts – 1 washington state – 1 the us department of homeland security added four airports – dallas, detroit, newark and dulles – to the list of airports where us citizens who have traveled to china in the last 14 days can enter the us, according to a statement from the agency.
the four new airports add to the seven gateway airports that were initially listed: jfk, lax, seattle, san francisco, chicago, atlanta and honolulu.
the restrictions began at 5 p. m.  et sunday night.
dhs says those airports have an increased ability to conduct enhanced screening procedures.
citizens who have been in hubei province in the last 14 days of their return will face 14 days of mandatory quarantine.
those who have been to other parts of china will have 14 days of self-quarantine.
foreign nationals will be largely denied entry to the us unless they are the immediate family members of us citizens, permanent residents or flight crew.
santa clara county, california, confirmed the second case of the novel coronavirus, the santa clara county public health department said sunday.
this second case of the virus is in an adult female, the public health department said in a statement.
the newest case is unrelated to the first case but both individuals recently traveled to wuhan, china, the department said.
the newest patient arrived january 23 to visit family in santa clara county, public health officials said.
"she has stayed home since she arrived, except for two times to seek outpatient medical care.
she has been regularly monitored and was never sick enough to be hospitalized," the statement said.
there have been four cases of the coronavirus in california.
the department of homeland security (dhs) announced it will begin enforcing restrictions for all passenger flights carrying individuals who have recently traveled from china in response to the coronavirus, according to a dhs press release that shed light on some of the procedures us air travelers can expect in the coming days the screening parameters reiterate much of what the health and human services secretary previously announced go into effect at 5 p. m.  et today – including that flights will be routed to seven designated us airports where the centers for disease control and prevention will seek to identify all potentially ill persons.
dhs adds that americans flying to the us from china will be re-routed to the designated airports at no cost to the traveler, the dhs said.
according to acting dhs secretary chad f.  wolf, to minimize disruptions, customs and border protection and air carriers are working to identify qualifying passengers before their scheduled flights.
dhs advises if a traveler who spent time in china, outside the hubei province, is re-routed through one of the seven airports and shows no symptoms following a health screening, they will be re-booked to their destination and asked to "self-quarantine" at their homes.
the department adds that any individual traveling from china who has either been in hubei province or other areas of the mainland, and is showing virus symptoms, will be screened and subject to mandatory quarantine by medical professionals at a nearby facility.
while the "overall risk to the american public remains low," acting secretary chad f.  wolf says "funneling all flights with passengers who have recently been in china is the most important and prudent step we can take at this time to decrease the strain on public health officials screening incoming travelers. "
national security adviser robert o'brien said that right "now there is no reason for americans to panic" with regards to the coronavirus, adding that "this is something that is a low risk we think in the us," according to an interview he did today with cbs' "face the nation. "
o'brien says that the us is working with chinese authorities, its health authorities and the world health organization to determine where the virus came from.
the us continues to offer the chinese assistance but have not heard back on that.
o'brien claims the chinese have been more transparent than in past crises.
"this is a worldwide concern we want to help our chinese colleague if we can," o'brien said.
"look i think we can be helpful if we're on the ground, right now the chinese are providing information to us and we're taking that for what it's worth but at the same time we're monitoring ourselves and what we're especially doing is monitoring the situation here in the states to make sure americans are continuing to be safe from this virus. "
pakistani students studying at wuhan university are appealing to the pakistan government to be evacuated from the epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak.
"we have been getting reports that the spread of this virus is going to double up in the coming 10 days and that the current weather is going to be favorable for a further spread of the virus.
there is a panicked situation and we are appealing to the pakistani government, please take us to a safe location.
anywhere in china, we have very little children with us.
they are compromised, they are more susceptible to the disease.
we are only getting verbal help from the embassy, no physical help.
i'd just like to add that we are willing to pay for our own expenses to get out of here but please for god's sake get us out of here.
please," mohammad adnan shireen told cnn.
last week the pakistani government stated they would not be evacuating any students in wuhan.
the second evacuation flight that will carry us citizens out of the epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak is on its way to the city of wuhan, a us official with knowledge of the matter told cnn.
the flight should be ready for departure on monday, as indicated in us embassy beijing's email to american citizens who are still in the central chinese city, according to this official.
there may be additional evacuation flights due to continued high-demand from us citizens in wuhan, the official added.
"i can't confirm the numbers yet, but this upcoming evacuation might not be the last," he said.
some context: last wednesday a chartered plane carrying some 200 us citizens -- including about three dozen diplomats and their families -- arrived at march air reserve base in southern california.
the official with knowledge to the matter told cnn all us diplomats and their families in wuhan were able to leave on this first flight.
israel has temporarily banned land, sea and airport arrivals from china to prevent the spread of coronavirus, according to the prime minister's office on twitter.
prime minister benjamin netanyahu on sunday warned that the arrival of the virus in israel could only be delayed, not prevented entirely.
"our objective first of all is to delay the virus from entering the country.
i say to 'delay' because it is impossible to prevent it from getting here afterwards to treat it, to find the people who have been exposed, to isolate them, and then to treat them," netanyahu told a meeting, including government ministers and leading health experts.
although there have been a number of people checked with coronavirus symptoms in israel, all of those tested for the virus so far have come back negative.
"because we expect that the virus will arrive here, we will deal with the processes that should be put in place to isolate the exposed and to treat them.
this treatment includes two weeks of isolation at home, we will explain to the citizens of israel exactly what is demanded of them," netanyahu said.
he also said that israel had updated the palestinian authority about the measures it should take to treat the virus.
netanyahu instructed israel's institute for biological research to begin working "at the greatest possible speed" to produce a vaccine and set up a vaccine center in israel.
he added that israel would began an information campaign to let israeli citizens know what to look for and what to do in case symptoms of the coronavirus are observed.
china's xiangyang city announced the shutdown of its railway stations and suspension of public transportation at the end of january.
with xiangyang's lockdown, all major cities in hubei province are now under lockdown, affecting more than 62 million people.
as of feb 1, there are 441 confirmed cases of coronavirus in xiangyang city, according to hubei provincial health commission.
hong kong has confirmed another coronavirus case, bringing the total cases in the city to 15.  the 15th case is reported to be a 72-year-old woman who is the mother of another person confirmed to have the infection in hong kong, according to a statement sunday from hong kong's health department.
the woman is under quarantine and in stable condition, the health department said.
"according to the patient's information, she had no travel history and mainly stayed at home during the incubation period," according to the health department's statement.
german health minister jens spahn announced two more people have tested positive for coronavirus in germany, taking the total in the country to 10.  the pair are both in frankfurt, in the german state of hesse, and are doing well, spahn said, noting they will be kept in a clinic for two weeks until they are free of infection.
the two confirmed cases arrived in frankfurt on a german air force flight flight from wuhan, china, on saturday.
germany's foreign ministry said friday that around 100 german citizens would be repatriated and be put under quarantine for two weeks in order to prevent the spread of the disease.
the minister said that they are monitoring if there were any other infections during the incubation period but he hopes that is not the case.
the previous eight confirmed cases are all in bavaria state.
the minister noted that the government aims to be as transparent as possible and he is very thankful for his colleagues in bavaria and hesse.
when it comes to questions about the infection, they [the government] will answer as transparently as possible.
the formula e championship has called off next month's sanya e-prix race in china due to the coronavirus outbreak, formula e said in a statement on sunday.
the race was scheduled for march 21.  the statement said: "given the current growing health concerns and with the world health organisation declaring the coronavirus an international emergency, formula e has taken the necessary measures to ensure the health and safety of its travelling staff, championship participants and spectators, which remains of paramount importance," the statement said.
as news of the virus has spread, many people of asian descent living abroad say they have been treated like walking pathogens.
a malaysian-chinese social worker experienced the same thing on a london bus this week.
"a couple of people at an east london school i work in have asked me why chinese people eat weird food when they know it causes viruses," she told cnn.
in canada, there have been reports of chinese children being bullied or singled out at school.
in new zealand -- where there are no confirmed coronavirus cases -- a singaporean woman says she was confronted and faced racist harassment in a mall.
read the full story here.
a second french plane carrying european citizens from wuhan will land in istres, france, on sunday, the belgian foreign ministry said in a statement.
some passengers will disembark at istres and be placed in quarantine before the plane continues on to melsbroek air base, in belgium.
belgian passengers will be taken care of in belgium, and dutch, danish, czech and slovak citizens will be repatriated to their own countries, the ministry said, calling it a "prime example of european cooperation. "
the plane was chartered by france, and is part of the european crisis management mechanism.
five czechs and two slovaks are on board the plane, according to the czech ministry of foreign affairs.
they will be flown from belgium to the czech capital of prague on a government plane.
british citizens are also thought to be on this flight.
uk foreign secretary dominic raab said sunday that 11 britons who failed to leave wuhan last week are now on a french flight returning to the uk sunday.
all eight people diagnosed with coronavirus in bavaria, germany, are in a stable condition, the bavarian health ministry said in a statement sunday.
germany has confirmed its eighth case of coronavirus on saturday.
the patient, a 33 year-old man from munich, works at the same company as six of the previously known coronavirus cases in germany.
the eight person with the virus in germany is a child of one of the people diagnosed earlier, the ministry said.
the detection was possibly due to a test campaign for all employees at the the firm, the statement said.
the great firewall of china has always been annoying, but it's not usually this deadly.
as the wuhan coronavirus continues to spread around china and the world, many are questioning how much the country's colossal censorship apparatus played a role in withholding vital information about the epidemic until it was too late.
in the weeks after the virus was first detected in wuhan, local and national authorities followed the usual playbook for any potential controversy: knee-jerk censorship and tight control of the narrative.
as the crisis has worsened, however -- with thousands of confirmed cases and hundreds of deaths nationwide -- it has become clear that the failure to take quick action likely undermined any chance of containing the virus.
heads will likely roll in wuhan, where the city's mayor zhou xianwang has already publicly offered to resign, admitting that his administration's warnings were "not sufficient. "
a number of uk citizens who failed to leave the coronavirus-struck chinese city of wuhan last week are now on a second flight to europe, uk foreign secretary dominic raab said sunday.
speaking to sky news, raab said he could not confirm the "precise number" of those arriving into the uk on sunday.
a number of uk citizens had trouble reaching the muster point in time for the first flight out because of road blocks and other restrictions in place in wuhan.
britons being brought from wuhan to the uk are being placed in quarantine at arrowe park hospital in the wirral, northwest england, raab said.
the first flight on friday returned 83 uk nationals.
a new case of coronavirus has been reported in the united arab emirates, the country's fifth, the ministry of health and prevention announced on saturday.
the patient, who arrived from wuhan, is "stable and under medical care," the ministry said in a statement, adding there is "no cause for concern" for the public.
the national airlines of egypt, qatar and saudi arabia have halted flights to and from china.
the wuhan coronavirus has brought back memories of the 2003 outbreak of the severe acute respiratory syndrome, known as sars, which infected more than 8,000 people and killed 774.  like sars, this latest outbreak is caused by a coronavirus, a family of viruses common to animals that range from the common cold, to more serious diseases, like middle east respiratory syndrome (mers).
here is how the two compare: the south korean government is banning entry to all foreign nationals who visited china's hubei province in the past 14 days.
the measure starts on february 4, according to south korean prime minister chung sye-kyun.
chung also said south korean citizens who had visited the province in the past 14 days should voluntarily quarantine themselves at home for two weeks after they arrive back into the country.
a system that allows chinese citizens to enter south korea's jeju island without a visa is to be temporarily suspended.
singapore, australia, new zealand, and the united states have banned all foreign nationals traveling from china from entering the country.
the first case of coronavirus was detected in central china in early december.
now, nearly two months later, it's a full-blown global emergency, with more than 14,300 confirmed cases across the world.
here's a look back at how we got here: december 8: first patient develops symptoms of wuhan coronavirus
december 31: earliest cases of virus reported to world health organization (who)
january 1: seafood and wildlife market in wuhan, where the outbreak is believed to have originated, is closed for disinfection
january 7: chinese scientists identify pathogen involved as new strain of coronavirus
january 9: first death linked to virus
january 20: cases reported in beijing and shenzhen
january 23: wuhan is placed on lockdown, with movement halted in or out of the city.
a total of 60 million people are affected by travel restrictions in wuhan and neighboring cities.
who says virus is not yet a public health emergency of international concern
january 28: death toll tops 100.  the number of confirmed cases in mainland china overtakes the deadly 2003 sars outbreak
january 30: who declares a public health emergency of international concern
january 31: death toll tops 200
february 2: first wuhan coronavirus death reported outside of mainland china  correction: a previous version of this post contained a map that misattributed the source of provincial coronavirus case totals.
the data comes from each province's health authority, not china's national health commission.
france is helping evacuate 10 mexican citizens from wuhan, the capital of hubei province and the city where the coronavirus outbreak started.
the 10 mexican nationals are first flying to france after being examined to confirm they don't have symptoms, mexico's foreign ministry and health ministry said in a joint statement saturday.
in france "they will follow the health protocols established by the authorities of that country. "
after that, the group will return to mexico, the ministries said.
a number of countries have evacuated their citizens from wuhan, including australia, germany and france.
wuhan authorities have finished building a new 1,000-bed hospital to treat coronavirus patients, state media cctv reported sunday.
wuhan mayor zhou xianwang handed the new huoshenshan hospital over to the military on sunday morning.
according to cctv, 1,400 military medical personnel will start in the hospital from monday.
state media first reported on january 23 that authorities planned to build a new pneumonia hospital.
according to the beijing news, a state-backed newspaper, it is a prefabricated, box-type model that can be built in six days.
another medical facility -- the leishenshen hospital -- is under construction and is set to open on february 5.  together, the two hospitals will give an additional 2,600 beds for patient care during the outbreak.
it's not the first time china has built a hospital in a short period of time.
during the 2003 sars outbreak, the 1,000-bed xiaotangshan hospital was constructed in six days and seven nights in beijing.
if you've traveled in or transited through mainland china, you won't be allowed into new zealand unless you're a new zealand national.
the new restrictions on foreign nationals begin on february 3, prime minister jacinda ardern announced in a press release sunday.
the ban will be in place for up to 14 days, and is aimed at helping contain the spread of the wuhan coronavirus.
so far, there have been no confirmed coronavirus cases in new zealand or any south pacific island.
new zealand citizens and permanent residents and their immediate family members will still be able to enter -- but must self-isolate for 14 days after arriving back into the country.
what does the new zealand government say about traveling to china?
the ministry of foreign affairs and trade has raised its travel advice for mainland china to "do not travel," the highest level.
"(cabinet) have been advised by health officials that while there are still a range of unknowns in the way the virus is being transmitted, we should take a precautionary approach and temporarily stop travel into new zealand from mainland china, and of people who have recently been in china," ardern said.
other countries have also banned people traveling from china  on saturday, australia said it was denying entry to all travelers coming from, or who had transited through, mainland china.
australian citizens, permanent residents and their immediate families, and air crews who used appropriate protective equipment, are exempt.
on friday, the united states said it will deny entry to foreign nationals who have traveled in china in the last 14 days.
chinese premier li keqiang has called on manufacturers to ramp up production of medical equipment needed to control the coronavirus outbreak.
li -- who is the second-most powerful man in china -- said it was important to "make every minute count," according to a government press release sunday.
"manufacturers are like military contractors producing the 'arsenal' in this battle against the epidemic," li said.
li warned that getting daily necessities could become more challenging, and stressed the need to keep supply chains open to ensure groceries are available for the public.
previously, li asked the european union to help china procure medical supplies, according to a chinese government statement.
what's the background?
china is facing a public health care crisis.
patients, medical staff and experts have told of delays in testing for the virus, in informing the public the true nature of the virus' spread, and of an already overburdened health system creaking under the enormous weight of a rapidly expanding outbreak.
people in wuhan have told cnn that some hospitals have run out of the test kits needed to diagnose patients with coronavirus.
wuhan health authorities have acknowledged that hospitals are overwhelmed, and the city is building two more hospitals within days.
airlines operating in the united states will be required to ask all passengers booked on flights from outside the us if they've been to mainland china in last 14 days.
the transport security administration (tsa) will issue a new security directive to airlines from sunday, according to a person briefed on the restrictions.
chinese nationals coming from china and connecting through another foreign airport will be denied travel.
those with pre-clearance are exempted.
there are also new directives that relate to us citizens.
us citizens who have been to china in the last 14 days need to re-book to one of seven gateway airports: john f.  kennedy international airport in new york, los angeles international airport, seattle, san francisco international airport, chicago, atlanta and honolulu.
tsa notified airlines saturday about the restrictions.
cnn is reaching out to tsa for comment.
the wuhan coronavirus has spread throughout the world since the first cases were detected in central china in december.
the vast majority of the cases are  in mainland china, where more than 14,000 people have been infected and 305 people have died.
but there are also more than 160 confirmed cases abroad.
one person has died outside of mainland china -- a 44-year-old chinese man in the philippines.
here's the full list of places outside mainland china with confirmed cases: hong kong -- at least 13 cases
macau -- at least 7 cases
thailand -- at least 19 cases
australia -- at least 12 cases
malaysia -- at least 8 case
singapore -- at least 13 cases
france -- at least 6 cases
japan -- at least 20 cases
south korea -- at least 15 cases
taiwan -- at least 10 cases
united states -- at least 8 cases
vietnam -- at least 7 cases
germany -- at least 8 cases
sri lanka -- at least 1 case
cambodia -- at least 1 case
nepal -- at least 1 case
canada -- at least 4 cases
uae -- at least 4 cases
finland -- at least 1 case
philippines -- at least 2 cases, including 1 death 
india -- at least 1 case
italy -- at least 2 cases
uk -- at least 2 cases
russia -- at least 2 cases
sweden -- at least 1 case
spain -- at least 1 case british airways, qantas and lufthansa -- among others -- have announced they will stop flying to mainland china.
other airlines are reducing the number of flights.
there's a few factors that play into this.
travel alerts: as the wuhan coronavirus spreads around china, infecting more people, a number of countries have raised their travel advisory warnings.
the united kingdom, for instance, is now warning against all but essential travel to mainland china, and is advising against all travel to hubei province, where the outbreak was first reported.
looking after their staff: airlines are under pressure from their staff, who obviously want to protect themselves.
on friday, the us association of flight attendants -- which represents 50,000 flight attendants across 20 airlines -- called on the government to work with airlines to discontinue all travel to china until the spread of coronavirus is contained.
slow business: due to fear -- and travel warnings -- fewer people want to travel to china.
that impacts airlines' business, making it less financially attractive for them to fly those routes to china.
as united airlines said when suspended flights to beijing, shanghai and chengdu, the decision was made "due to the continued drop in demand for travel to china and the us department of state's decision to raise its china travel advisory to a level 4. "
read more about what's going on here.
the philippines reported its first wuhan coronavirus fatality on sunday.
the victim -- who died saturday -- was a 44-year-chinese man who flew in from wuhan in january.
it's the first confirmed wuhan coronavirus death from outside of mainland china, and brings the total toll to 305.   he was the partner of a 38-year-old chinese woman who was travelling with him.
she was the first confirmed case reported in the philippines.
both patients were being treated in isolation units at a manila hospital.
secretary of health francisco duque said authorities are working with the chinese embassy to respectfully handle the remains of the man while following international protocol to contain the disease.
defense secretary mark esper has approved a request to provide military housing for up to 1,000 people who may need to be quarantined after arriving in the us from overseas travel, the pentagon said in a statement.
the department of health and human services asked the defense department to provide several facilities capable of housing at least 250 people in individual rooms through to february 29, the pentagon said.
what's the background?
on friday, the trump administration announced it will deny entry to foreign nationals who have traveled in china in the last 14 days, starting sunday.
any us citizen who has been in china's hubei province -- epicenter of the outbreak -- in the last 14 days will be allowed back into the country.
but they'll be subject to up to 14 days of mandatory quarantine once they're back in the us.
us citizens who've been in other parts of mainland china in the last 14 days will undergo screening at us ports of entry and up to 14 days of self-monitoring.
american airlines and delta air lines announced more flight cancellations to china on saturday as coronavirus cases continued to rise.
delta said it will suspend flights between the united states and china starting on sunday until at least april 30, according to a press release.
that's four days earlier than it had initially planned.
delta's last china-bound flight left on saturday, february 1, and its final returning flight from china to the united states leaves on sunday.
delta moved the date up after the us state department warned that people should not travel to china due to concerns about the spread of coronavirus, which was first discovered in wuhan, hubei province, in december.
united airlines -- which announced that it will suspend flights to beijing, chengdu and shanghai from february 6 -- is also reducing flights from the us to hong kong.
yet it's not only us carriers that are cancelling flights.
here's a list of other airlines that have reduced -- or completely cut -- flights to china: british airways
air asia
cathay pacific
air india
indigo
lufthansa
finnair 
qantas
qatar airways three more patients have been confirmed infected with coronavirus in south korea, bringing the country's total to 15, the south korean centers for disease control and prevention (kcdc) announced in a press release.
the kcdc said a 28-year-old man had tested positive.
he was among the 368 repatriated south koreans who arrived from wuhan on a charter flight on january 31.  the rest of the evacuees have tested negative for the coronavirus.
a 40-year-old chinese woman also tested positive.
she was already in quarantine as she is related to another patient who contracted the virus.
in china, wuhan used to be known as a city of cherry blossoms, an economic engine of the central heartland, and the birthplace of a century-old revolution that brought down the country's last imperial dynasty.
but now, the metropolis of 11 million in hubei province has become the face of a deadly coronavirus outbreak -- a stigma the people of wuhan increasingly find themselves unable to shake off.
with the death toll surging past 300 and 14,300 cases confirmed, authorities across the country have activated the highest public health emergency response, stepping up screening of arrivals from wuhan.
fears over the continuing spread of coronavirus have also fueled resentment and discrimination.
some have become outcasts in their own country, shunned by hotels, neighbors and -- in some areas -- placed under controversial quarantine measures.
wuhan officials estimate about 5 million people had left the city for the annual lunar new year holiday before authorities canceled all outbound flights, trains and buses in an unprecedented lockdown on january 23.  april pin, a wuhan resident, wrote a widely circulated open letter pleading her countrymen to forgive those who left without knowing: "many of my friends who left wuhan did not realize (how severe) the situation was," she wrote read more about pin -- and the plight of people from wuhan -- here.
australia has started denying entry to all travelers who have come from or transited through mainland china.
the new rules started saturday -- however if you're an australian citizen, permanent resident or their immediate family, or an aircrew member who has been using appropriate protective equipment, you're exempt.
prime minister scott morrison said saturday that all travelers from mainland china allowed into australia had to be quarantined for 14 days.
he added that the government raised the travel advice warning to level four, the highest, meaning they're now advising people not to travel to mainland china.
the warning aims to address "the issue of the human-to-human transmission of the coronavirus. "
australia's ban followed an earlier move by the us friday to deny entry to foreign nationals who have traveled in china in the last 14 days.
any us citizen who has been in the hubei province in the last 14 days will be subject to up to 14 days of mandatory quarantine upon return to the united states.
villages and cities in china have resorted to flying drones with speakers to patrol streets and scold people not wearing masks in public amid the coronavirus outbreak, according to chinese state media.
both xinhua and the global times have published videos of drones warning various people in rural areas that masks need to be worn in "these times. "
the drones were seen scolding an elderly lady and chasing a child down the road.
the videos have gone viral on chinese social media and have been praised as a novel way to raise awareness of the disease.
global times reported that local officials had been putting up slogans in an effort to get communities to stay at home during the epidemic and to avoid people gathering together to slow and prevent the spread of the coronavirus.
a total of 304 people had died from coronavirus in mainland china by the end of saturday, according to the country's national health commission.
so far, there have been no deaths outside the mainland.
the vast majority of the deaths have occurred in the province of hubei, of which wuhan is the capital.
wuhan -- home to 11 million people -- is the epicenter of the outbreak.
the total number of confirmed cases in mainland china is now 14,380 -- an increase of 2,590 from friday's total.
apple is temporarily closing all of its stores in china because of the coronavirus outbreak.
according to apple's website, all 42 stores will be closed until february 9.  the website still works for customers in china.
here's what apple told cnn business in a statement: "out of an abundance of caution and based on the latest advice from leading health experts, we're closing all our corporate offices, stores and contact centers in mainland china through february 9. "
"we will continue to closely monitor the situation and we look forward to reopening our stores as soon as possible. "
read more here.
over the past few days, there's been a question dominating chinese social media: could a traditional chinese medicine help fight the wuhan coronavirus?
the questions came after state-run xinhua news agency reported friday that the shanghai institute of materia medica and the wuhan institute of virology had discovered that the shuanghuanglian oral liquid -- a popular combined herbal remedy commonly used to relieve some symptoms such as fever, cough, and sore throat -- could be used to "inhibit" the deadly virus.
but others aren't convinced -- they think one of the country's most influential state media outlets could be promoting pseudoscience and false hope.
social media users -- including numerous medical experts -- questioned whether the findings were supported by clinical evidence from treating coronavirus patients.
others -- somewhat more cynically -- wondered if this was a concerted effort to promote certain herbal products to boost their makers' share prices ahead of the chinese stock market's re-opening monday.
nevertheless, many other didn't appear to need confirmation.
posts on weibo, china's twitter-like platform, purportedly showed people lining up at night outside pharmacies across china to buy shuanghuanglian.
such was the apparent demand sparked by the notice that the compound formula sold out on some stores on china's e-commerce platform taobao.
read more here.
there's still a lot we don't know about the coronavirus, and scientists internationally are racing to gather data and develop a treatment.
here's what we can tell you so far: is there a cure?
not at the moment.
researchers have successfully grown the virus in a lab, an important step towards developing a vaccine -- but it could be a year or more until it's available.
what are the symptoms?
coronavirus symptoms can look like the flu -- fever, cough, trouble breathing.
if you show these symptoms and recently went to china, or have been in contact with someone who visited, experts advise going to the doctor.
how does the virus spread?
the virus is thought to spread from person to person through respiratory droplets emitted by coughing or sneezing -- but it's not clear exactly when a person becomes contagious.
there's currently no evidence that the virus is airborne -- meaning, for instance, it doesn't travel across a large room.
who is at risk of infection?
people of all ages can be infected with the virus, but older people and those with pre-existing medical conditions are especially vulnerable to severe complications.
how can i protect myself?
take the same precautionary measures you would during flu season.
wash your hands often with soap and water, cover your nose and mouth when you sneeze or cough, avoid close contact with people or large gatherings, and wear a face mask.
is it safe to travel?
airlines have suspended flights, and thousands of foreign citizens in the chinese city of wuhan have been evacuated back to their home countries.
many countries including the us have advised against travel to china.
in a matter of weeks, the number of wuhan coronavirus deaths in mainland china has overtaken the 2003 severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) epidemic in the country, as beijing injected billions of dollars into an economy hit by effective shutdowns to major cities.
since its outbreak in december, more than 360 people have died of the disease in china, the country's health authorities said monday.
the total number of cases in mainland china stood at 17,205 as of sunday evening, an increase of over 2,800 on the previous day, or almost 20%.
the 2003 outbreak of sars -- another coronavirus strand -- infected 5,327 people in mainland china, with 349 deaths.
there were 8,098 confirmed cases of sars worldwide from november 2002 to july 2003, with 774 deaths globally.
the first death from the virus outside china was confirmed over the weekend.
philippine health officials said that a 44-year-old chinese man died saturday after flying into the country from wuhan.
so far, more than 180 cases have been reported outside of china -- the majority of them with a direct link to the country -- across more than 25 countries and territories worldwide.
many countries have begun closing their borders to visitors from china, with major airlines canceling flights to and from the country.
hong kong leader carrie lam on monday announced new border closures over the wuhan virus, amid intense public pressure to stop anyone crossing into the city from mainland china.
lam said further measures were being taken "to ensure the control of the boundary control points to reduce people movement across the border," but fell short of a complete sealing off of the city.
germany confirmed its 10th case on sunday, and there were also new cases reported in south korea, vietnam, malaysia, macao and hong kong.
the united states, australia and new zealand have all announced that they will not allow foreign nationals who have traveled from or transited through china to enter.
nationals from those countries will face mandatory quarantine on arrival.
the g7 nations will hold a joint telephone conference to discuss how to deal with the coronavirus outbreak, german health minister jens spahn announced after talking with his american counterpart alex azar on sunday.
economic pain in china, monday is supposed to be the first day back at work after an extended lunar new year holiday ended on february 2.   however much of the country will not be returning, with multiple local authorities extending the break in an attempt to avoid further spread of the virus.
hubei, the central chinese province of which wuhan is the capital, will lengthen its holiday by an "appropriate extent," authorities said saturday, while beijing, shanghai, chongqing and the manufacturing provinces of guangdong and zhejiang will also reportedly remain on holiday until at least next week.
with much of china's economic heartland still closed, concerns are growing over the impact to the chinese economy.
the shanghai and shenzhen stock markets -- which have been closed since january 24 -- plunged by around 10% on opening monday.
the people's bank of china said sunday it would inject 1.
2 trillion yuan ($173 billion) into the chinese markets in order to ensure "reasonably ample liquidity" in the banking system and keep currency markets stable.
the net amount of liquidity being injected into the markets will be much lower, however.
according to reuters calculations using central bank data, more than 1 trillion yuan worth of other short-term bond sales will mature monday.
that brings the net amount of cash flooding into the markets down to 150 billion yuan ($21.
4 billion).
state news agency xinhua on monday published a defiant commentary headlined "chinese economy resilient enough to counter virus shock. "
"the epidemic will eventually come to an end, just like the winter will fade away.
the negative implications of the virus on the chinese economy will be short-lived, and the economic fundamentals are solid enough to withstand its blow," xinhua said.
"doomsayers take this chance to hype again the china-collapse theory.
but seasoned observers disagree. "
it quoted a former chief economist at the asian development bank saying that while the economic impact in the first quarter will likely be big, perhaps driving nationwide annual growth down a percentage point, "it will be substantially offset by above-the-trend growth in the rest of the year if the epidemic can be contained soon. "
fight to control the virus in wuhan itself, the epicenter of the virus outbreak where most of the deaths have been reported, there was a glimmer of hope monday, as the first of two purpose-built hospitals opened for business.
the hospitals, built in about a week by thousands of workers on round-the-clock shifts and based on a similar plan used during the 2003 sars outbreak, will be run by people's liberation army medical personnel.
they will add thousands of extra beds to wuhan's extremely strained medical system.
thousands of health workers, including pla medics, have also been dispatched to help out in ordinary hospitals in the city and other parts of hubei.
but while wuhan should be seeing some additional capacity monday, hong kong will be seeing the opposite.
health care workers in the semi-autonomous chinese city began a five-day strike on monday over what they see as the failure of the city's government to fully shut the border with china.
they are demanding a full border closure and greater support from the government.
in announcing the new border closures, lam said further measures were being taken "to ensure the control of the boundary control points to reduce people movement across the border," but fell short of completely sealing off the city.
lam said the main land borders at lo wu and lok ma chau would shut as of midnight tonight, as would the hong kong-macau ferry terminal.
that will leave all but three border crossings between hong kong and mainland china closed.
those which remain open are the city's international airport, the shenzhen bay border and the hong kong-zhuhai-macau bridge.
there is widespread fear in hong kong -- where 15 coronavirus cases have been confirmed so far -- of a repeat of sars, which infected more than 1,700 people and killed 286 in 2003.  most front line medical workers will not strike, their unions said, in order to continue serving the public, but backroom and support staff will walk out.
studying infection many countries have begun evacuating their citizens out of the worst hit areas of hubei, while other nations, in addition to closing their borders to all visitors from china, are ordering mandatory quarantines of nationals returning home.
major airlines -- including british airways, american airlines, air canada and lufthansa -- have canceled or slashed routes to china for the foreseeable future.
much of the concern is driven by the lack of a confirmed cure or treatment protocol for the virus, which appears to be far more contagious -- though not as deadly -- as sars.
about 10% of sars cases resulted in death, while the toll from wuhan coronavirus cases stands at about 2%.
on sunday, doctors in thailand said they had successfully treated one wuhan coronavirus patient with a combination of antiviral drugs.
dr.  kriangsak atipornwanich, a doctor at rajavithi hospital in bangkok, said at a ministry of health news conference that he had treated a 71-year-old woman patient from china with a combination of drugs used in hiv and flu treatments.
he said the patient had previously been treated only with anti-hiv drugs.
officials at the news conference said the latest lab test showed there was no trace of the virus in the patient's respiratory system.
hospitals in beijing have previously reported using hiv drugs to treat coronavirus patients, though it is unclear if they have been successful.
with some apparent good news came another worrying development, however.
scientists in china discovered over the weekend that fecal samples from patients infected with the wuhan coronavirus tested positive for the pathogen.
this means it is highly possible the virus can exist in and spread through contaminated fecal matter.
previously it had been thought the virus mainly spread through droplets emitted when a person coughs or sneezes, or through other direct contact.
one of the major sars outbreaks during the 2003 epidemic was in the hong kong housing estate of amoy gardens.
there, the virus is believed to have spread "via aerosolized fecal matter through the internal sewer system," according to a report by the us national institute of medicine.
asian markets are continuing to recover after being shaken by coronavirus fears.
china's shanghai composite index rose 1.
3% wednesday, building on tuesday's modest rebound.
but the index has still not recovered from its heavy losses monday, when it plunged nearly 8% and recorded its worst single-day performance since 2015.  japan's nikkei 225 advanced 1% on wednesday.
hong kong's hang seng index rose 0.
3%, while south korea's kospi moved up 0.
4%.
several companies that have been affected by the coronavirus outbreak also made gains wednesday, though there are still concerns about how the virus could impact business in the long term.
shares of macao casino operators rebounded in hong kong after recording losses tuesday, when the macao government said it would suspend casino and gambling businesses for two weeks.
a total of 41 entertainment operations in macao have been closed for 15 days starting from wednesday, according to a government statement.
sands china and galaxy entertainment were last up 0.
5% and 1%, respectively.
cathay pacific jumped 3.
3% in hong kong, a day after the city's flagship airline said it would progressively cut flights to mainland china by 90% as demand fell sharply because of the outbreak.
the stock is still down about 11% this year, though.
other airline stocks also recovered in asia.
major chinese carriers climbed in both china and hong kong.
air china's shanghai-listed stock was the top gainer among them, up 4.
4%.
qantas airways, the flagship carrier of australia, rose 0.
8% in sydney.
meanwhile, a flood of data released wednesday showed somewhat promising signs for major economies in asia despite the spreading coronavirus.
private survey data released wednesday showed that while china's services sector grew in january, it did so at a slower pace than the month before.
the caixin services purchasing managers index registered at 51.
8 in january, down from december's 52.
5.  a reading above 50 indicates growth from the previous month.
the data is still "impressive," since it covers the initial outbreak of the virus and the mass shutdowns in china over the lunar new year, according to jeffrey halley, senior market analyst for asia pacific at oanda.
he said in a research note that economic data out of japan and singapore was also positive.
"altogether, this morning's january data implies that asia is showing a degree of unexpected resilience," halley said, though he refrained from predicting when the outbreak may reach its peak.
officials in china are racing to contain the outbreak of a new virus that has left at least nine people dead and sickened more than 440, after it was confirmed the infection can be passed between humans.
the spread of the respiratory virus to thailand, japan, south korea, taiwan, and now the united states, is fueling fears of a broader epidemic, as china enters its busiest travel period of the year.
wuhan, the central chinese city where the coronavirus was first detected, announced a series of new measures tuesday, including the cancellation of upcoming lunar new year celebrations, which had been expected to attract hundreds of thousands of people.
tour agencies have been banned from taking groups out of wuhan and the number of thermal monitors and screening areas in public spaces will be increased.
traffic police will also conduct spot checks on private vehicles coming in and out of the city to look for live poultry or wild animals, after the virus was linked to a seafood and live animal market, according to a report by state media outlet the people's daily, citing wuhan's municipal health commission.
the new measures come after chinese president xi jinping ordered "resolute efforts to curb the spread" of the virus monday.
there are now fears, however, that efforts to contain it are coming too late, hampered by a slow-moving chinese bureaucracy which failed to put sufficient measures in place in time.
in the coming days, hundreds of millions of chinese are expected to begin traveling across the country and overseas as the annual lunar new year break gets fully underway, compounding concerns of a further spike in cases.
though infections were first detected in wuhan in mid-december, infrared temperature screening areas were not installed in the city's airports and stations until january 14, according to state media.
more than 440 cases of the virus have been confirmed across china, with the majority in wuhan itself, but also as far afield as beijing, shanghai and guangdong province, near hong kong.
the death toll rose to nine wednesday morning.
among the victims are a 66-year-old man and a 48-year-old woman who died on january 20, according to the wuhan municipal health commission.
the majority of those who have died as a result of the virus have been elderly and had pre-existing conditions.
cases confirmed worldwide around a month after the virus was first identified in wuhan, it has already spread well beyond mainland china.
in asia, cases have been detected in taiwan, south korea, thailand and japan, while authorities in the us confirmed their first case on tuesday and there have been reports of potential cases in australia.
despite initial reports that the virus was unlikely to spread between humans, chinese health authorities have now said there is "definitely human-to-human transmission. "
one patient is believed to have infected as many as 14 medical staff in one hospital, suggesting the disease can be spread far more easily than previously thought.
the specter of sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome), which infected more than 8,000 people and killed 774 in a pandemic that ripped through asia in 2002 and 2003, has loomed large over discussion of the current virus.
during the sars outbreak, chinese authorities initially downplayed the dangers and censored coverage, preventing people from realizing the severity of the virus and taking action in time to stop its spread.
zhong nanshan, an expert with china's national health commission who is investigating the wuhan virus, told state media monday that while it is not as serious as sars, the number of people with the disease was "climbing" and suggested that the "death rate at the moment is not so representative. "
a study by researchers in the uk estimated that the number of infections in wuhan is still grossly underestimated, with the real number closer to 1,700, based on the spread of the virus to other cities and countries in a relatively short period of time.
us authorities announced the country's first confirmed case on tuesday.
the patient, a young man, had been traveling and arrived at seattle-tacoma international airport in washington state before health screenings for the virus began.
worldwide effort even before cases were detected in other countries, the efforts to contain the wuhan coronavirus were international.
wuhan alone has connections to dozens of overseas destinations, and beijing and shanghai have hundreds more.
airports across asia have stepped up temperature screening of incoming passengers, as have several hubs in the us with connections to wuhan, including new york, san francisco and los angeles.
with all indications that the virus has a relatively slow incubation time, however, these efforts may be insufficient to stop its spread.
"you cannot absolutely prevent entry into the country of a disease like this.
the incubation period is probably a week," australia's chief medical officer, brendan murphy, said tuesday.
"it's about identifying those with a high risk and making sure people with a high risk know about it and know how to get medical attention. "
he said that while there was no cause for immediate alarm, the true number of cases was likely far higher than currently reported and urged people to be vigilant about potential symptoms.
australian authorities on tuesday quarantined a man in brisbane who had returned from wuhan with possible symptoms of the coronavirus.
he will remain in isolation until his symptoms have resolved, queensland health authorities said.
raising concerns about how difficult it is to detect those with the virus, even if they have some symptoms, a patient in south korea told doctors there she had developed a fever and muscle pains on saturday and was prescribed cold medicine by a doctor in wuhan, before being sent on her way.
she was later confirmed to have the coronavirus during a check in seoul.
in the us, the national institutes of health is working on a vaccine for the new virus, though it will take at least a few months until the first phase of clinical trials get underway and more than a year until a vaccine might be available.
scientists in texas, new york and china are also at work on a vaccine, according to peter hotez, a vaccine scientist at baylor college of medicine in houston.
"the lesson we've learned is coronavirus infections are serious and one of the newest and biggest global health threats," hotez told cnn.
the world health organization will convene an emergency meeting on wednesday to determine whether the outbreak constitutes a public health emergency of "international concern" and what recommendations should be made to help manage its spread.
the us department of veterans affairs has administered more than 2.
1 million covid-19 vaccine doses, dr.  richard stone, acting under secretary for health at the va, said during a senate hearing wednesday.
"yesterday, as of feb.  23, va had administered well over 2.
1 million doses of the vaccines," stone said.
"these include over 1.
1 million first doses to veterans and 484,000 doses – first and second doses – to va employees, which have inoculated well over 90% of our clinical staff. "
stone said that among enrolled veterans over 75, who are currently prioritized for vaccination, "25% of white, 28% of hispanic and 30% of black veterans have been vaccinated. "
he added that 73% of the total va workforce has received the vaccine.
stone said the agency has the capacity to deliver between 300,000 and 600,000 vaccine doses per week.
"we were just called on the way over here to say that we would be getting about 500,000 doses this coming week," stone said.
"we have seen a gradual increase, and we are very hopeful with the new vaccine that's coming on the market that we will continue to see increases, and the problems that we're having with the amount of vaccine will resolve itself over these next number of weeks. "
##vaccines## a large study of people across england found strong antibody protection in people who got both doses of the pfizer/biontech vaccine – but people who had been infected and got just a single dose had even stronger responses.
the react-2 study by scientists at imperial college london found that three weeks after receiving the first dose of the pfizer/biontech vaccine, 84% of people under the age of 60 tested positive for antibodies against sars-cov2.
among those who had received one dose but had suspected or confirmed prior infection with covid-19, this rose to 90%.
"we have found a really good response, measured by antibody prevalence, in those who have had two dose of the vaccine and those who have had one dose," helen ward, professor of public health at imperial college london, told reporters at a news conference.
"i hope this will be used to encourage people get their second dose. "
"there's clearly value in getting that first dose," added graham cooke, professor of infectious diseases at imperial college london.
"we don't have enough data yet on the long-term protection of one dose. "
the study of 155,000 people tested between jan.  28 and feb.  8 covered 18,000 vaccinated people, including 13,000 who got the pfizer vaccine.
the findings paint a picture of which groups had been most affected by coronavirus during england's second wave.
infections were highest in people living in london (16.
9%).
more than 22% of people of black ethnicity appeared to have been infected and 20% of people of asian background had.
just 8.
5% of whites had evidence of having been infected.
concerns around vaccine confidence were also raised, being more common among younger people and black people.
reasons for low confidence included worries about pregnancy, allergies and fertility, the study found.
##vaccines##  two separate teams of researchers say they have found a worrying new coronavirus variant in new york city and elsewhere in the northeast that carries mutations that help it evade the body's natural immune response – as well as the effects of monoclonal antibody treatments.
one of the mutations is the same concerning change seen in the variant first seen in south africa and known as b.
1.
351.  it appears to evade, somewhat, the body's response to vaccines, as well.
and it's becoming more common.
"we observed a steady increase in the detection rate from late december to mid-february, with an alarming rise to 12.
7% in the past two weeks," one team, at columbia university medical center, write in a report that has yet to be published, although it is scheduled to appear in pre-print version this week.
they've named the most common variant b.
1.
526.  it appears in people affected in diverse neighborhoods of new york city, they said, and is "scattered in the northeast. "
the mutation in this variant that most concerns researchers is called e484k and it gives the virus the ability to slip past some of the body's immune response, as well as the authorized monoclonal antibody treatments.
this mutation is popping up independently in many different cases but appears in one particular variant, as well – the one called b.
1.
526.
"it is this novel variant that is surging, alarmingly, in our patient population over the past few weeks," the columbia team led by infectious disease specialist and aids researcher dr.  david ho, wrote.
but the e484k mutation is seen in at least 59 different lineages of coronavirus, they said – which means it is evolving independently across the nation and across the world in a phenomenon known as convergent evolution.
it may give the virus an advantage.
separately, a team at the california institute of technology said they developed a software tool that also spotted the rise of b.
1.
526 in new york.
"it appears that the frequency of lineage b.
1.
526 has increased rapidly in new york," they wrote in a pre-print – a report that has not been peer-reviewed but has been posted online.
##variants## about 66.
5 million doses of covid-19 vaccine have been administered in the united states, according to data published wednesday by the us centers for disease control and prevention.
the cdc reported that 66,464,947 total doses have been administered, about 75% of the 88,669,035 doses delivered.
that's about 1.
4 million more administered doses reported since yesterday, for a seven-day average of about 1.
5 million doses per day.
about 14% of the population — more than 45 million people — have now received at least one dose of vaccine and more than 6% of the population – about 20.
6 million people have been fully vaccinated with both shots, cdc data shows.
note: data published by the cdc may be delayed, and doses may not have been given on the day reported.
##vaccines## alaska gov.
mike dunleavy tested positive for covid-19 wednesday, according to his office.
"he is currently at home with mild covid-19 symptoms," the governor's office said in a statement.
dunleavy had been in quarantine since sunday when it was determined he was in close contact with another person who had a confirmed coronavirus case.
his initial test on sunday came back negative, but he remained in precautionary quarantine.
the governor's office said he was retested after he began to feel ill tuesday night.
because he has avoided close contacts since sunday, dunleavy's office said it is not believed that the governor could have spread the coronavirus to anyone else.
the covid-19 vaccination site at medgar evers college in brooklyn — one of the largest vaccination sites in new york state — opened today.
the college is set up to vaccinate 3,000 new yorkers a day.
cnn's alexandra field was on the ground answering your questions about the vaccine roll out.
watch more: us hospitals are projecting a significant revenue shortfall in 2021 due to the pandemic, according to a new report commissioned by the american hospital association.
in an optimistic scenario, hospitals and health systems could suffer a $53 billion loss in total revenue in 2021.  under a more pessimistic budget scenario, that revenue loss could total $122 billion this year.
the optimistic projection assumed that vaccine supply, distribution, and administration aren't delayed and residents continue to practice social distancing until herd immunity is achieved.
the pessimistic scenario, on the other hand, would be more likely to come true if vaccine supply and distribution are delayed and residents don't practice social distancing, both of which contribute to a cyclical rise in covid-19 cases and hospitalizations.
more insight: treating covid-19 patients is more expensive for hospitals, especially when they can't offset those costs with as much usual expected revenue from non-covid patients.
"during the pandemic, people have put off needed care, in some cases to the detriment of their health," rick pollack, aha president and ceo, said in a news release.
"in addition, the costs of labor and supplies have increased, adding to financial stress. "
hospitals aren't just plagued by decreased non-covid patient volume.
they also saw added expenses in many categories last year.
those costs included a 17% overall uptick in drug expenses per patient discharged and a 16% increase in purchased services per patient, which can include the cost of sterilization and maintaining safe spaces with covid-19 patients.
labor expenses were up 14%, due in part to hospitals needing to hire contract labor and give hazard pay to workers.
and supply expenses were up 13%, as hospitals needed to purchase personal protective equipment, as shortages of needed equipment led to increased prices.
the new projections come after an aha report last summer estimated that hospital revenues for 2020 would be down at least $323.
1 billion.
the johnson & johnson covid-19 vaccine seems to work better against the coronavirus variant first identified in south africa than data initially suggested.
the variant, which is thought to be more contagious, currently makes up the majority of cases in south africa and has been found in several countries, including in the united states.
according to a us food and drug administration's briefing document released wednesday, the vaccine showed a 64% efficacy rate in south africa.
that's seven points higher than what was reported in interim data released by the company in january.
since that time, johnson & johnson did additional sequencing and determined there were more cases that could be included in its analysis from south africa.
nearly 95% of the cases in the study in south africa came from the variant, according to the addendum to the analysis.
"the fact that the numbers came up a little bit, once they fully analyzed the data from the time of the initial press release, shows that it's not that different against the south african variant," said dr.  philip grant, who was the lead investigator on the stanford university arm of the j&j vaccine trial.
"i think it's going to have to be looked at more carefully, in terms of which vaccines are most effective in different locations. "
the vaccine has a 72% efficacy rate in the us and a more than 68% rate in brazil at protecting people from mild to severe/critical disease.
the vaccine offered nearly 86% protection against severe forms of the disease in the us, nearly 82% in south africa and nearly 88% in brazil.
experts have said variants may fuel a surge of cases in the us, and that's one reason why it's important to get as many people vaccinated as quickly as possible.
##vaccines## moderna has designed an updated version of its covid-19 vaccine to help it combat the south africa coronavirus variant, the company announced wednesday.
initial doses have been shipped to the us national institutes of health for a clinical study.
the new vaccine, called mrna-1273.
351, will be evaluated as a booster shot for people who have already been vaccinated against coronavirus and as a primary vaccine for people who haven't had coronavirus and have yet to be vaccinated.
moderna said it will also evaluate a "multivalent" booster shot that combines the new vaccine formulation with the current vaccine.
additionally, the company said it has begun to test whether a third, lower dose of its current covid-19 vaccine can increase immunity against coronavirus variants of concern, with some study participants already getting third doses.
on monday, the us food and drug administration issued new guidance to vaccine makers to address the emergence of coronavirus variants.
the agency recommended that data from clinical immunogenicity studies be used to support any changes or updates to vaccines.
such studies would be smaller and could take less time than large-scale clinical trials.
"it's going to be on the order of a few hundred individuals in terms of size and we'd expect that that might take a few months," dr.  peter marks, director of the fda's center for biologics evaluation and research, said during a call with reporters on monday.
moderna said it plans to "evaluate immunogenicity and safety in participants" consistent with the recently updated guidance.
"we are moving quickly to test updates to the vaccines that address emerging variants of the virus in the clinic.
moderna is committed to making as many updates to our vaccine as necessary until the pandemic is under control.
we hope to demonstrate that booster doses, if necessary, can be done at lower dose levels, which will allow us to provide many more doses to the global community in late 2021 and 2022 if necessary," stephane bancel, moderna's ceo, said in a news release wednesday.
moderna did not say how long it expects the studies to take, or when the new vaccine would be available, if authorized.
##vaccines## ##variants## moderna has shipped approximately 55 million covid-19 doses to the us to date, the company said wednesday.
an additional approximately 33 million doses have been produced, filled into vials and are in the final stages of production and testing before being released to the us, moderna said in a news release.
the company now plans to manufacture 700 million doses globally this year, an increase of 100 million doses.
in 2022, it says its global capacity will increase to approximately 1.
4 billion doses of covid-19 vaccine.
moderna said it is making new financial investments to achieve that increased capacity at manufacturing sites.
the influx of money will enable additional production of moderna's covid-19 vaccine and potential production of new versions of the vaccine that may be needed to combat coronavirus variants.
the company said it could potentially manufacture even more doses in 2022 if studies show new variant-based versions of the vaccine can be administered at lower dosages than the current vaccine.
##vaccines## the white house officially announced it will continue the national emergency declared by the previous administration surrounding the covid-19 pandemic.
the national emergency was declared last year on march 13, 2020.  in a news release issued today, the white house said "the covid-19 pandemic continues to cause significant risk to the public health and safety of the nation," adding that the declaration "must continue in effect beyond march 1, 2021. "
north carolina gov.
roy cooper said he will sign a new executive order that starts on friday that will ease some of the covid-19 restrictions that have been in place in the state since the beginning of the pandemic.
the new executive order lifts the modified stay-at-home order that requires people to stay in their residences and businesses to close to the public between 10 p. m.  and 5 a. m.  local time.
cooper and department of health and human services secretary dr.  mandy cohen said the statewide mask mandate remains in effect.
indoor gathering limits increase from 10 to 25, with the limit of 50 for outdoor gatherings remaining the same, the order said.
the curfew for alcohol sales for onsite consumption will now be from 9 p. m.  to 11 p. m.  under the new order.
the order also lightened capacity limits for event venues.
indoor venues that have a capacity over 5,000 can now allow 15% capacity as long as they follow additional safety measures.
previously, this limit was at 250 people, regardless of venue size.
outdoor venues can now have a capacity of 30%.
by the numbers: according to the state dashboard, 849,630 cases have been reported since the start of the pandemic.
there have also been 11,074 deaths reported in north carolina.
the dashboard showed that 2,180,655 doses of covid-19 vaccine have been administered in the state.
to note: these numbers were released by the state's public health agency and may not line up exactly in real-time with cnn's database drawn from johns hopkins university, the covid tracking project and the us centers for disease control and prevention.
##restrictions## honduras authorized the emergency use of the russian sputnik v vaccine against covid-19, according to a report from the honduran health regulatory agency (arsa) on wednesday.
arsa detailed in a statement that the authorization was dated feb.  19 and was based on the consideration of the "regulatory authorities of regional reference," as a measure to control the pandemic.
the russian direct investment fund (rdif), russia's sovereign wealth fund, announced that honduras is the 36th country to approve the use of the sputnik v vaccine.
##vaccines## further delays in the delivery of astrazeneca vaccines are "extremely frustrating," said belgian regional health minister wouter beke during a meeting of the flemish parliament wednesday afternoon.
"there are doubts due to the lack of vaccine supply.
i share that annoyance with you with 200%," beke said.
"that means that we constantly have to puzzle and re-puzzle.
that is extremely frustrating for those who have to try to do this again every day. "
beke said belgium only got 88,800 doses of the astrazeneca vaccine this week instead of the expected 114,716 doses.
"next week: 21,600 instead of 19,167; and the week after we should get – but i'll see before we believe it – 127,200 instead of 33,984 deliveries," beke said.
the lack of supply this week will be made up for in future deliveries, beke said but there remains a structural shortage of 31,714 doses across belgium.
he added that the delay in vaccine deliveries is no reason to doubt the efficacy of the vaccine.
##vaccines## white house press secretary jen psaki said the administration was "surprised" when johnson & johnson told them they were behind on manufacturing.
cnn has reported the initial number of doses was expected to be closer to 10 million, and covid-19 coordinator jeff zients said wednesday it would be between 3 and 4 million.
cnn's kaitlan collins pressed psaki on the amount of johnson & johnson vaccine that will be deployed next week, pending emergency use authorization from the food and drug administration.
"we were surprised to learn that johnson & johnson was behind on their manufacturing.
as you noted, it was kind of reported earlier to be about 10 million and now it's more like 3 to 4 million doses that they would be ready to ship next week if they are moved through the fda process which is not yet concluded," psaki said.
she continued, "we're going to continue to work with them on ensuring that that can be expedited. "
##vaccines## watch:  são paulo, brazil, will begin a statewide curfew this friday, the state's governor, joão doria, announced today.
the curfew — which will run from 11 p. m.  until 5 a. m.  local time and will remain in place until march 14 — requires bars and restaurants to close and prohibits people from being out in the streets.
the decision is part of a bid to slow the spread of the coronavirus, which has led to record hospitalizations.
as of monday more than 6,400 patients were hospitalized in icus across the state, up from the previous record of 6,250 recorded last july.
"it's a historic record since february last year when we had our first case of covid in brazil, here in the state of sao paulo," doria said.
the governor also said large gatherings will be prohibited at any time of day, and regulations will be enforced with fines.
the increase in hospitalizations is likely due to large gatherings and parties organized 10 days prior during carnival, the state's emergency covid-19 center coordinator, paulo menezes, said in a press conference.
menezes said a more contagious variant of the coronavirus might also have played a part.
correction: an earlier version of this post included the wrong end date for são paulo's curfew.
the curfew will remain in place until march 14.
##restrictions## ##hotspots## france's health minister announced that the city of dunkirk in northern france and its surrounding region, an area of 250,000 people, will be put under a new weekend lockdown starting this friday night.
the minister said the measure was taken as dunkirk is facing a surge of covid-19 cases, due to the spread of the british variant.
french health minister olivier véran said that one in 100 of the population of dunkirk is infected by the virus every week.
under the lockdown, only essential shopping and travel will be allowed.
the lockdown will be in effect every weekend until further notice.
the government took a similar decision on monday for the southern region of the alpes-maritimes where a partial lockdown is going to be put in place between the coastal towns of menton and theoule over the next two weekends in an effort to curb a surge in covid-19 cases and the spread of new variants.
##variants## the biotechnology company novavax expects to apply for emergency use authorization for its covid-19 vaccine sometime in the second quarter of 2021, dr.  gregory glenn, president of research and development for novavax, said during a live q&a with the washington post on wednesday.
"last week we finished recruiting 30,000 people in the us and mexico and we're expecting that result right at the beginning maybe of quarter two – so pretty soon – and shortly thereafter we would be filing for what we call eua or emergency use authorization in the us," glenn said.
"so, we're thinking quarter two and then deployment could come fairly quickly," glenn said.
"the vaccine we expect to be deployed widely. "
the company announced monday that it has completed enrollment of its prevent-19 trial, a phase 3 study of its covid-19 vaccine in the united states and mexico.
the trial enrolled 30,000 volunteers across 118 locations.
##vaccines## johnson & johnson initially was behind on manufacturing its covid-19 vaccine when the biden administration took office last month, but it's getting better, a white house official said wednesday.
"when we got here five weeks ago, we learned that j&j was behind on manufacturing and our team has been working with them since, and i think they're in a better place now," jeff zients, white house covid-19 response coordinator, said during a news briefing.
"we've helped them with equipment and raw materials, which i think is helping to increase greater capacity," he said, adding that the initial production ramp was "slower than we'd like. "
"it was disappointing when we arrived," zients said.
"i think the progress is real and we look forward to continuing to work with the company to accelerate their delivery and their capacity. "
what happens next: pending an emergency use authorization from the us food and drug administration, zients said the biden administration is preparing rollout plans for 3-4 million doses of the johnson & johnson covid-19 vaccine next week.
zients said states will receive around 2 million doses of the vaccine, and the remaining doses will be allocated to pharmacies and community health centers.
##vaccines##  dr.  anthony fauci said he hopes that therapeutic approaches to treating long covid could come from medications already available, but the newly announced initiative to study on long covid may provide answers.
the aim is to learn more about how the virus may lead to widespread and long-lasting symptoms and to develop ways to treat or prevent them.
initially, the initiative will look at areas including the spectrum of recovery across the population and what the underlying biological cause of prolonged symptoms.
"it's very difficult to treat something when you don't know what the target of the treatment is.
and that's the reason why it's extremely important to take a look at these individuals, not only the scope of this, and not only the, you know, depth and breadth of the symptoms, but also to try and have some correlate that actually is a path of physiological correlate," fauci said at a briefing from the white house covid-19 response team on wednesday.
"once we get that, an important part of this is, as i mentioned, would be to design therapeutic approaches, hopefully by medications that we already have, we just need to know how to use them," fauci added.
long covid: a study published friday found that 30% of people with covid-19 continue to have symptoms up to nine months after initial infection.
the most commons symptoms were fatigue and loss of taste or smell, although some reported cough, trouble breathing, muscle aches and brain fog.
nearly a third reported worse quality of life compared to before getting sick, and some said they had trouble performing at least one usual activity, such as daily chores.
dr.  fauci discusses 'long covid':  multiple senate sources familiar with the matter said arguments were made on both sides this morning on the $15 federal minimum wage hike – and whether it fits within the rules of budget reconciliation.
the senate's parliamentarian, elizabeth macdonough, has not yet ruled on the matter, and it's not clear yet when she will.
democrats and the white house are attempting to push biden's $1.
9 trillion covid relief package through the senate by reconciliation, meaning the bill could pass with a simple majority of 51 votes and not require 60 votes to overcome a filibuster.
reconciliation, however, has a strict set of rules, and provisions have to undergo a review of whether it has an impact on the budget and not just an "incidental" one.
##us stimulus## switzerland will move forward with a phased reopening of its economy and society which will see some coronavirus restrictions lifted on march 1, the swiss federal government announced during a news conference wednesday.
all shops in switzerland will reopen on march 1, with restrictions limiting the number of customers.
museums, libraries, zoological and botanical gardens, sports, and outdoor leisure facilities will also reopen.
most sporting and cultural activities for people under 20 will also resume.
people in switzerland will also get the green-light to meet outdoors in groups of more than 15 people beginning march 1.  swiss president guy parmelin said outdoor dining could resume on march 22 rather than the previously planned date of april 1, if the situation permits.
restaurants in switzerland have been closed since dec.  22, with non-essential shops shuttered since jan.  18.   parmelin said the gradual reopening will be "a source of dissatisfaction for some," adding that while the "impatience that some people have is understandable," the situation in switzerland "remains very fragile due to new variants of the virus which continue to progress.
the swiss government said it would reassess the situation on march 12.   alain berset, a member of the swiss federal council, tweeted wednesday that the government has taken "a calculated risk: for society, for the economy and especially for young people, particularly touched by this crisis. "
on wednesday, at least 1,343 new coronavirus cases were recorded by the federal office for public health.
switzerland has recorded at least 552,698 coronavirus cases and at least 9,256 deaths since the pandemic began.
##restrictions## the international air transport association (iata) is calling on governments around the world to start issuing digital vaccine credentials to support a successful restart of international travel once borders re-open.
"it's absolutely critical that we start issuing digital vaccine credentials," iata's head of airport passenger & security products, alan murray hayden, said on wednesday.
"many airports are really operating at capacity at the moment, even though they are only carrying 10% of the normal volumes of passengers.
and that's simply because of the amount of time it currently takes to check all the bits of paper that a passenger needs to have.
it takes so much time that we simply won't be able to reopen in a sustainable way," he added.
iata's travel pass, an app developed by the international air transport association directly connects passengers with their covid-19 test results from the labs, is one option airlines are piloting to process covid data digitally.
iata is scheduling to fully roll out its travel pass at the end of march, which is currently being trialed with 20 airlines around the world.
"governments have been introducing quarantines; however vaccine and testing is the way in which we're going to exit from the requirements for people to quarantine and the iata travel pass will enable people to do that," hayden said.
iata warned that the industry is still suffering from the current restrictions still in place for international travelers predicting that airlines will burn through up to $95 billion during 2021.  the supply of covid-19 vaccine doses being allocated to states and retail pharmacies is increasing, jeff zients, white house covid-19 response coordinator, said on wednesday.
"from 8.
6 million doses when we took office to 14.
5 million doses this week, that's an increase of vaccine allocations to states of nearly 70% during the biden-harris administration," zients said during a white house news briefing.
"in this week, we will increase the allocation to pharmacies to 2.
1 million doses," zients said.
"so, with 14.
5 million doses allocated to states, tribes and territories, and 2.
1 million through the federal retail pharmacy program, we've nearly doubled weekly supply of doses in just five weeks. "
##vaccines##  pending an emergency use authorization from the us food and drug administration, white house covid coordinator jeff zients said the biden administration is preparing rollout plans for 3-4 million doses of the johnson & johnson covid-19 vaccine next week.
"while we await the fda decision, we want the american people to know that we're doing the work so that if the eua is issued, we will waste no time getting this lifesaving vaccine into the arms of americans," zients said at wednesday's virtual covid briefing.
"if authorized, we are ready to roll out this vaccine without delay," zients said, noting that this vaccine's distribution will mirror the current allocations process across jurisdictions, pharmacies, and community health centers.
after initially telling the nation's governors to expect 2 million doses next week, zients said wednesday that the administration anticipates allocating "3 to 4 million doses of johnson & johnson vaccine next week. "
johnson & johnson has announced it aims to deliver 20 million doses by the end of march, but, zients said, "we're working with the company to accelerate the pace and timeframe by which they deliver the full 100 million doses, which is required by contract by the end of june. "
some context: johnson & johnson's single-shot coronavirus vaccine appears to be safe, according to a 62-page briefing document released by the us food and drug administration on wednesday.
data on the vaccine will be discussed in a meeting of the fda's vaccines and related biological products advisory committee on friday.
that committee will decide whether to recommend that the fda issue an eua for the vaccine.
##vaccines## watch:  white house covid-19 response coordinatorjeff zients said today during a covid press briefing that the biden administration will deliver more than 25 million masks across the country.
"the masks will be available at more than 1,300 community health centers and at 60,000 food pantries nationwide.
any american who needs a mask can walk into these health centers or food pantries and pick up high-quality, american-made masks. "
zients said the cloth masks will be available at no cost, will come in children's and adult sizes, and can be washed for reuse.
see the announcement:  there's new evidence that connects testing positive for covid-19 antibodies from a prior infection with a significantly lower risk of becoming infected again in the future.
a study published in the journal jama internal medicine on wednesday found that people who tested positive for covid-19 antibodies were at a decreased risk of coronavirus infection compared with those who tested negative for antibodies.
"the results from the study are basically a 10-fold reduction, but i would have caveats around that.
in other words, it could be an overestimate of the reduction, it could be an underestimate of the reduction," said dr.  douglas lowy, principal deputy director of the national cancer institute, who was an author of the study.
"to me, the big message is – there's a reduction," he said.
"the main takeaway is that being antibody positive after natural infection is associated with partial protection against a new infection. "
the researchers – from the national cancer institute and the companies labcorp, quest diagnostics, aetion inc.  and healthverity – examined data on more than 3.
2 million people in the united states who had completed a covid-19 antibody test last year between january and august.
among those tested, 11.
6% tested positive for covid-19 antibodies and 88.
3% tested negative.
in follow-up data, the researchers found that only 0.
3% of those who tested positive for covid-19 antibodies ended up testing positive for coronavirus infection later, beyond 90 days.
whereas, 3% of those with negative covid-19 antibody test results were later diagnosed with coronavirus infection during that same time period.
overall, the study is observational and it suggests there is an association between positive covid-19 antibody test results and a lower risk of infection some 90 days later – but more research is needed to determine a causal relationship and for how long protection from antibodies may last.
lowy said that more research is also needed to determine the risk of reinfection from one of the emerging coronavirus variants.
he also emphasized that people who have tested positive for antibodies should still get vaccinated against covid-19.
two studies published wednesday by the us centers for disease control and prevention linked covid-19 outbreaks over the summer in chicago and hawaii to exercise facilities.
the reports suggest that mask use may be a key mitigation strategy in these settings.
in chicago, 60% of people who attended in-person fitness classes between august 24 and september 1 tested positive for covid-19.
another 7% of attendees reported symptoms consistent with the disease.
while some mitigation measures were in place at the facility – including required temperature checks and symptom screenings upon entry – removal of masks was permitted during exercise, according to the report by researchers from chicago and the cdc.
in hawaii, 21 cases were linked to a fitness instructor who tested positive for covid-19 on july 1, said the report by researchers from hawaii and the cdc.
about two days before experiencing symptoms, the fitness instructor led a yoga class for 27 people while wearing a mask.
there were no reported cases among these participants.
a few hours before symptom onset, the same instructor led a stationary cycling class for 10 people, none of whom wore a mask.
all participants later tested positive for covid-19, including a second fitness instructor linked to additional cases.
according to the first report, "the increased respiratory exertion that occurs in the enclosed spaces of indoor exercise facilities facilitates transmission" of the virus.
even when spaced 6 feet apart, the cdc recommends the use of a mask to reduce transmission in fitness facilities.
they also say that facilities should improve ventilation and encourage patrons and staff to follow proper quarantine and isolation protocol after potential exposure to covid-19 or the onset of symptoms.
the johnson & johnson vaccine might prevent covid-19 infection without symptoms starting at about four weeks, according to the us food and drug administration's briefing document on the vaccine released wednesday.
earlier studies from the us centers for disease control and prevention have shown that most coronavirus cases are spread by people without symptoms.
if a vaccine prevented asymptomatic infection, it might help reduce opportunities to transmit the disease – not just keep the vaccinated from getting sick.
the clinical trial looked for asymptomatic infections among the volunteers at several points after they had been vaccinated.
the trial found that the vaccine had "modest" protection against asymptomatic infection from day one through day 29, but after that, it seemed to offer protection.
when the volunteers were checked at 71 days after they had gotten the vaccine, it seemed about 74% effective against asymptomatic infections.
the document says these findings should be "interpreted with caution" and additional research is needed, since the follow-up time is limited and the number of volunteers in this sample was comparatively small, so "definitive conclusions cannot be drawn at this time. "
##vaccines## an ensemble forecast published wednesday by the us centers for disease control and prevention now projects there will be 526,000 to 548,000 coronavirus deaths in the united states by march 20.   notably, this forecast extends a week beyond the previous forecast, but the projected number of deaths has dropped.
normally, each new cdc forecast projects a greater number of total deaths over a longer period of time.
the previous ensemble forecast, published february 17, projected up to 559,000 coronavirus deaths by march 13.   at least 502,698 people have already died from covid-19 in the united states, according to data compiled by johns hopkins university.
cnn's john king reviews the latest us covid-19 numbers:  another sign of stiff republican opposition to biden's covid-19 relief plan: at a closed-door meeting today, one house gop member after another railed against the measure, according to reps.  doug lamborn and tom reed.
no one spoke in favor of it.
reed, a member of the bipartisan problem solvers caucus, told me that he will vote against the plan.
"there's so many issues with the bill that the popularity of it is gonna wear off," reed said.
republican leaders see opposition to the bill as key to unifying their party after a divisive few months of intra-party squabbling.
##us stimulus## johnson & johnson's single-shot coronavirus vaccine appears to be safe, according to a 62-page briefing document released by the us food and drug administration on wednesday.
an analysis of safety data through january – which included more than 40,000 adults – "supported a favorable safety profile with no specific safety concerns identified that would preclude issuance of an eua," the fda noted in the document.
the fda advisory committee noted in the briefing document that the most common side effects associated with the vaccine were pain at the injection site, headache, fatigue and muscle pain.
there appeared to be more incidents related to blood clotting and ringing in the ears among those who received the vaccine compared with those who didn't, but the fda notes, "data at this time are insufficient to determine a causal relationship between these events and the vaccine. "
overall, non-fatal serious adverse events were infrequent, according to the briefing document, and there were no reported cases of anaphylaxis following vaccination.
as of feb.  5, there were seven covid-19-related deaths in the placebo group and no covid-19-related deaths in the vaccine group.
nineteen deaths total had been reported as of jan.  22 – three among those who received the vaccine and 16 among those who received a placebo.
then from jan.  22 to feb.  5, according to the document, an additional six deaths occurred – two in the vaccine group and four in the placebo group.
data on the vaccine will be discussed in a meeting of the fda's vaccines and related biological products advisory committee on friday.
the committee will decide whether to recommend that the fda issue an emergency use authorization, or eua, for the johnson & johnson vaccine.
##vaccines## a combined flu and covid-19 vaccination is a future possibility, a leading british virologist testified wednesday.
wendy barclay, head of the department of infectious disease at imperial college london, told uk lawmakers: "[the] most likely scenario is that a combination vaccine would be given going forwards in the future, which would combine influenza, with an updated sars-cov-2. "
"but that really is crystal ball gazing to an extent.
i think the next year will really tell us much more about the epidemiology of how this new coronavirus [variant] will settle down, and how quickly it might mutate and necessitate vaccine updates, and how long the immunity for the current vaccines that we're going to rollout to a large proportion of the uk population will last, and therefore how necessary it will be to give boosters. "
##vaccines##   johnson & johnson says that it has four million doses of its covid-19 vaccine ready to ship "immediately" once it receives emergency use authorization, which could happen this week.
in an analysis just released, the us food and drug administration said the company's single-dose vaccine has met the requirements for emergency use authorization.
however, despite the excitement and anticipation, there are still several steps johnson & johnson has to go through before the vaccine will be available.
here's what happens next: the fda's vaccines and related biological products advisory committee meets on friday to review data on the vaccine and decide whether to recommend it for emergency use authorization in adults 18 and older.
once the vaccine is authorized, the us centers for disease control and prevention advisory committee on immunization practices, or acip, makes recommendations to the cdc on how the vaccine should be used, such as among what age groups and on what type of schedule.
an emergency meeting of acip is scheduled for feb.  28 and march 1.  typically, the cdc director accepts the committee's recommendation.
shortly after that, the vaccine can be distributed, and can start going into arms.
what everyone wants to know is where the federal government will send those doses, and who they'll be steered toward.
"we're hoping that acip will provide some guidance on the most effective use of the j&j one dose vaccine," claire hannan, executive director of the association of immunization managers, wrote in an email to cnn on tuesday.
"states are looking for guidance for use of the vaccine in populations which might really benefit from the one dose series complete, such as transient populations," hannan said.
"we aren't hearing much on this. "
you can read more about the johnson & johnson vaccine here.
##vaccines## in an analysis released wednesday, the us food and drug administration said johnson & johnson's single-dose covid-19 vaccine has met the requirements for emergency use authorization.
the efficacy of the johnson & johnson vaccine against moderate to severe/critical covid-19 across all geographic areas was 66.
9% at least 14 days after the single dose vaccination, and 66.
1% at least 28 days after vaccination, a new analysis meant to brief the fda's vaccines and related biological products advisory committee said.
"there were no specific safety concerns identified in subgroup analyses by age, race, ethnicity, medical comorbidities, or prior sars-cov-2 infection," the analysis said.
in a briefing document, the fda said that it has reviewed the data for the vaccine and has determined that it is "consistent with the recommendations set forth in fda's guidance emergency use authorization for vaccines to prevent covid-19. "
an independent group of fda advisers, the vaccines and related biological products advisory committee, will consider the documents and make a recommendation about whether the covid-19 vaccination should be authorized.
the committee meets on friday.
watch more: ##vaccines## the national institutes of health announced a new initiative to study long covid, and "to identify the causes and ultimately the means of prevention and treatment of individuals who have been sickened by covid-19, but don't recover fully over a period of a few weeks," a statement from nih director dr.  francis collins said.
"while still being defined, these effects can be collectively referred to as post-acute sequelae of sars-cov-2 infection (pasc).
we do not know yet the magnitude of the problem, but given the number of individuals of all ages who have been or will be infected with sars-cov-2, the coronavirus that causes covid-19, the public health impact could be profound," said the statement, released tuesday.
in december, nih was provided with $1.
5 billion over four years to support research into the long-term health consequences of coronavirus infection, and on wednesday it announced the first research opportunities for the pasc initiative.
about the initiative: the aim is to learn more about how the virus may lead to widespread and long-lasting symptoms and to develop ways to treat or prevent them.
initially, the initiative will look at areas including the spectrum of recovery across the population and what the underlying biological cause of prolonged symptoms.
initial research will support ongoing and new research studies, as well as the creation of core resources.
"through the pasc initiative, we now ask the patient, medical, and scientific communities to come together to help us understand the long-term effects of sars-cov-2 infection, and how we may be able to prevent and treat these effects moving forward," collins said.
a study published friday found that 30% of people with covid-19 continue to have symptoms up to nine months after initial infection.
the most commons symptoms were fatigue and loss of taste or smell, although some reported cough, trouble breathing, muscle aches and brain fog.
nearly a third reported worse quality of life compared to before getting sick, and some said they had trouble performing at least one usual activity, such as daily chores.
france is "likely" to alter its guidance and allow people aged 65 and over to get the astrazeneca vaccine, a spokesman for france's health ministry told cnn wednesday.
france had previously said astrazeneca's covid-19 vaccine should only be administered to people aged under 65, citing a lack of clinical data on its efficacy for older people.
"this opinion is likely to change in the near future based on the results of clinical trials on this age group," the spokesman said.
"a scottish study on the efficacy of the astrazeneca vaccine seems to indicate very positive results," he added.
a row erupted across europe earlier in the year after germany's vaccine commission, quickly joined by a handful of other countries, said the astrazeneca vaccine shouldn't be given to the over-65s, citing insufficient data.
the decisions came amid an ongoing dispute between the european union and astrazeneca over delays to the delivery of its coronavirus vaccine to the bloc.
the european drug regulator approved the use of the vaccine for all ages, and the company has said its data supported its use for over 65s.
but french president emmanuel macron went as far as suggesting the vaccine was "quasi-ineffective" in people over 65, a comment that drew sharp criticism from many experts.
france's reassessment follows italy's decision tuesday to raise the age limit for astrazeneca's vaccine by ten years, now approving it for use on people up to 65.   early data on the pfizer and oxford-astrazeneca shots in scotland showed that by the fourth week after the initial dose, both vaccines had a significant impact on hospital admissions.
the pfizer vaccine reduced the risk of hospital admission from covid-19 by up to 85%, and the oxford-astrazeneca vaccine reduced the risk of hospitalization by up to 94%.
the study is the first to look at the two vaccines' effect on preventing severe illness resulting in hospitalization across an entire country, with previous efficacy results coming from clinical trials.
unlike france and italy, scotland does not have an age cap on who the astrazeneca vaccines is recommended for.
eleftheria vasileiou, data analyst at the university of edinburgh's usher institute, noted during a monday press briefing on the study that in scotland the "pfizer vaccine is given to all age groups but it's not been given terribly much to those people who are over 75".
she said in scotland the astrazeneca vaccine has been primarily going to people who are over 65.   by targeting vaccine distribution to more specific vulnerable populations, us states could have the opportunity to save thousands of lives and prevent even more hospitalizations, according to a new analysis shared exclusively with cnn.
health care data science firm cogitativo analyzed thousands of health insurance claims and county-level demographics in california to assess the most predictive and discriminative factors leading to poor outcomes following covid-19 infection.
by combining federal vaccination priority group recommendations with localized measures of the effects of factors such as air quality and access to fresh food, the company was able to more precisely pinpoint the most vulnerable individuals in the state and the counties where they live.
as demand for vaccine continues to outpace supply, there's still not sufficient supply to cover everyone within the top priority groups.
according to the analysis, dozens of counties in california would lack sufficient doses to serve the most vulnerable people in the state under federal guidance alone.
los angeles county, for example, would have a deficit of nearly 405,000 doses.
expanding those findings to the 10 largest states shows that about a third of counties would be lacking doses relative to the number of most vulnerable residents -- and about 5 million doses could make a deeper impact in the fight against covid-19 if reallocated to a different county.
"without a surgical approach to distributing the vaccine, more americans -- often in communities of color and rural areas -- risk being left behind," cogitativo ceo gary velasquez told cnn.
"the key is to use a combination of real clinical data and social determinants of health to surgically assess who is at greatest risk.
this approach can help states avoid acute deficits in certain counties. "
##vaccines## the uk will prioritise giving covid-19 vaccinations to people with learning disabilities, moving 150,000 people up the queue after weeks of public pressure to include them in the rollout sooner.
new guidance from the joint committee on vaccinations and immunisation (jcvi), which advises the government on its vaccine rollout, places people with severe and profound learning disabilities into priority group six.
"i have heard first-hand how tough this pandemic has been for people with learning disabilities and their families.
we are determined those more at risk from covid should be vaccinated as soon as possible," minister for care helen whately said in a statement sent to cnn.
"following the jcvi's updated advice and to make this process simpler and faster, we will be inviting everyone for vaccination who is on their gp's learning disability register.
this will mean those who are at a higher risk from the virus can get the protection they need. "
radio dj jo whiley has led a public campaign to have people with learning disabilities prioritised for vaccines, detailing the struggles of her sister who contracted the virus after an outbreak at her care home.
a study by the office for national statistics found that people with learning disabilities are more likely to die from covid-19.
priority group six, where those people have now been placed, consists of at-risk adults aged 16 to 65 who have a clinical condition that may make them more susceptible to catching the virus.
spain's prime minister has said he expects the country's number of covid-19 vaccine doses to quadruple in the second quarter of the year.
pedro sanchez told parliament that the government was committed to achieving a vaccination target of 70% of the population by the end of the summer.
the government has ordered 126 million doses of different vaccines -- more than 52 million from pfizer/biontech, more than 31 million from astrazeneca, 23.
5 million from curevac, about 21 million from johnson & johnson and eight million from moderna.
but spain's vaccination program has been affected by winter weather and a shortage of supply.
so far 3.
16 million doses have been administered and 1.
2 million people have received two doses.
sanchez was addressing lawmakers on the country's state of alarm, which is due to run through early may in an effort to limit transmission of the virus by restricting movement and imposing curfews.
some opposition parties have called for it to be lifted sooner, but sanchez rejected the demands, noting that the relaxation of restrictions around christmas had contributed to a "third wave" of the pandemic in much of europe.
ghana has become the first country to receive covid-19 vaccines through the world health organization's covax program on wednesday, a joint statement issued by unicef ghana and who ghana said.
the shipment, consisting of 600,000 doses of the astrazeneca vaccines, arrived at 7 a. m.  local time wednesday on an emirates flight at kotoka international airport, in ghana's capital accra.
the minister for health-designate, kwaku agyeman-manu, led a government delegation to receive the consignment.
the purpose of the covax scheme is to buy coronavirus vaccines in bulk and send them to poorer nations that can't compete with wealthy countries in securing contracts with the major drug companies.
as the plane carrying the vaccines landed, state-run ghana broadcasting corporation journalist abdul hayi-moomen declared: "the flight carrying the vaccines that we so much look forward to receiving, i believe hope has arrived. "
the vaccines were produced by the serum institute of india, in the indian city of pune, and are part of the first wave of covid-19 vaccines headed to low and middle-income countries, the joint statement added.
"today marks the historic moment for which we have been planning and working so hard," said unicef executive director henrietta fore.
"with the first shipment of doses, we can make good on the promise of the covax facility to ensure people from less wealthy countries are not left behind in the race for life-saving vaccines. "
the philippines has offered to allow thousands of health care workers to take jobs in the uk and germany if the countries agree to donate covid-19 vaccine doses in return, an official has said.
alice visperas, director of the labor ministry's international affairs bureau, said the philippines was open to lifting a cap on health care professionals working overseas if britain and germany sent vaccines in the other direction, reuters reported.
but the offer was rebuffed by the uk, which said it would continue to use shots on its own citizens until a surplus is available.
the philippines limits the number of medical professionals leaving the country to 5,000 a year.
"we are considering the request to lift the deployment cap, subject to agreement," visperas told reuters.
in response, a spokesperson for the uk's department of health told the agency it has "no plans for the uk to agree a vaccine deal with the philippines linked to further recruitment of nurses. "
britain has purchased many more vaccine doses than it has people, and has said it will distribute surplus doses to poorer countries.
coronavirus cases in the uk are declining after a winter wave of infections, but hospital admissions remain high.
britain has meanwhile overseen a successful vaccine rollout so far, inoculating more than 17 million citizens with at least one dose.
cases are also slowing in germany, but other parts of central europe are seeing infections tick upwards and german authorities have imposed new border checks on nearby countries.
read more on this story here.
##vaccines## chinese company cansino biologics said on wednesday it has filed an application with china's drug regulator for conditional approval of its covid-19 vaccine.
if approved, the company would become the nation's third vaccine maker to provide shots for conditional public use in china.
cansinobio said that phase 3 clinical trial results show that its coronavirus vaccine has an overall efficacy rate of 65.
28% at preventing all symptomatic cases and 90.
07% at preventing all severe cases 28 days after a single dose.
more than 40,000 volunteers in five countries participated in the trial, the statement added.
sinopharm, the first covid-19 vaccine developer whose doses were approved for conditional public use in china, has an overall efficacy rate of 79.
34%.
sinovac followed, with an overall efficacy rate varying from 50.
4% in trials in brazil to 91.
25% in trials in turkey.
##vaccines## greece is calling for the european union to adopt covid-19 vaccine "passports" in order to open up tourism and allow for summer vacations.
in an interview with the financial times, the minister of tourism, harry theocharis, stressed that the introduction of the vaccination certificate should be a matter of immediate priority for the european union.
"looking at the reaction of some countries to the proposals of the greek government regarding the vaccination certificate, there is a feeling of short-sightedness," he said.
"and while there is much to be done to prepare for the opening up of tourism and the economy, nevertheless, many countries are focusing too much on the current situation.
but we have to move much faster," he said.
theocharis said the eu needs to speed up decision making on protocols for the safe movement of european citizens from country to country.
"the european union must adopt the vaccination certificate without delay.
people need to know as soon as possible if they will be able to go on a summer vacation this year," he urged.
regarding the british government's ban on non-essential international travel, theocharis said: "i do not understand such warnings, given the progress that is being made in the uk with the vaccination rollout.
i cannot understand why we are now taking steps backwards, even though we now have more and more effective tools in our 'arsenal' compared to last year -- and i mean vaccines and 'rapid tests'. "
currently, a digital certificate is issued to those greek citizens who are vaccinated, but is not mandatory to travel to greece.
"our goal is simply to relieve those who have acquired immunity from being re-tested for covid-19 upon entering greece," he said.
global coronavirus cases fell by 11% in the week leading up to february 21, marking the sixth consecutive week of declining cases, the world health organization said tuesday.
who reported 2.
4 million new cases and 66,000 new deaths that week, a 20% drop in deaths from the week before.
that brings the total to 110.
7 million cases and more than 2.
4 million deaths since the coronavirus pandemic began, according to who figures.
the united states is currently reporting the highest number of new cases, followed by brazil, france, russia and india.
who noted that while many countries are reporting a decline in overall coronavirus cases, reports of covid-19 variants are increasing.
who said the b.
1.
1.
7 variant first detected in the uk has now been found in 101 countries, while the b.
1.
351 variant first detected in south africa has now been found in 51 countries.
the less prevalent b.
1.
1.
28.
1 variant — first identified in brazil and japan — has now been found in 29 countries.
##variants## ##hotspots## a new, more contagious variant of coronavirus first detected in the uk is likely to fuel a surge of cases in the spring, several experts predicted tuesday.
the variant, called b.
1.
1.
7, was suspected of causing renewed spread in britain.
it's been seen across much of the us -- with the us centers for disease control and prevention estimating the variant makes up for more than 1,880 cases in 45 states.
the variant could "result in more of a wave" around april or may, said trevor bedford with the university of washington and the fred hutchinson cancer research center.
so how can the us prevent the suspected spring surge?
some experts said tuesday the best way to get ahead of the surge is through vaccinations.
bedford, who has been closely following the rise of new coronavirus variants, predicted that vaccination and mitigation efforts, such as mask use and continued social distancing, will help prevent the virus from spreading further.
"i still do suspect that things will be brought under control in the summer, and there will be very little virus circulating," he said.
it's possible, however, that a new surge could begin in the fall, according to bedford.
the race to vaccinate: more than 44.
5 million people have received at least one dose of their two-dose vaccines, according to data tuesday from the cdc.
about 19.
8 million have been fully vaccinated with both doses, the cdc said -- about 6% of the us population.
one dose of vaccine *might* be enough for some, nih director says:  it's possible a single dose of the pfizer or moderna vaccine might be enough for those who have already been infected with coronavirus -- but it will take more research to show that, national institutes of health director dr.  francis collins wrote in a blog post tuesday.
read more about the situation in the us: ##variants## ##vaccines##
