China, Malaysia restart massive ‘Belt and Road’ project after hiccups.
by reuterssoutheast asian countries engaged in talks on a major china-backed trade pact expect to finalize it this year, the finance minister of thailand, which is the current chair of the 10-nation asean grouping, said on friday.
"the rcep is very important for this area, especially at a time that protectionism is increasing in this world," apisak tantivorawong said, referring to the regional comprehensive economic partnership (rcep) pact.
"i've heard that we will finalize by november this year," he told a news conference, referring to the agreement.
he was speaking after a meeting of finance ministers and central bank governors of the association of southeast asian nations (asean) in thailand's northern province of chiang rai.
"hopefully we can conclude by the end of the year," added the grouping's secretary general, lim jock hoi.
negotiations began in 2012 on rcep, which envisions the creation of a free trade zone encompassing 45 percent of the world's population and more than a third of its gdp but does not involve the united states.
in a joint statement, the grouping said it was committed to international trade and investment as key engines of growth and development.
"we reiterate our commitment to the pursuit of an integrated asean to support economic growth and strengthen financial stability in the region amidst heightened uncertainties arising from trade tension and policy adjustments of advanced economies," it said.
asean groups brunei, cambodia, indonesia, laos, malaysia, myanmar, the philippines, singapore, thailand and vietnam.
by reuterschina and malaysia resumed construction on a massive "belt and road" train project in northern malaysia on thursday, after a year-long suspension and following a rare agreement to cut its cost by nearly a third to about $11 billion.
the project was initially canceled by malaysian prime minister mahathir mohamad, who came to power after a shock election victory in may last year, as he followed through a pledge to renegotiate or cancel "unfair" chinese mega-projects approved by his predecessor, najib razak.
but in april, the close trade partners agreed to proceed with the east coast rail link (ecrl) at a cost of 44 billion ringgit ($10.
7 billion), reducing it from 65.
5 billion ringgit.
the 640 km line (398 miles), with china communications construction co ltd (601800. ss) as the lead contractor, will connect port klang on the straits of malacca with the city of kota bharu in northeast peninsular malaysia.
the agreement to resume work on the project had immediately boosted confidence in malaysia among foreign investors, china's ambassador to malaysia said at a ceremony in the coastal district of dungun.
flanked by cranes and trucks parked near a partly completed section of a tunnel, ambassador bai tian spoke of "a great wave" of potential chinese investors coming to malaysia for field studies, and he expected many of them to decide to invest.
china is debt-heavy malaysia's biggest trade partner and the countries have close cultural ties too.
ambassador bai said the completion of the ecrl, expected by december 2026, could more than double the number of chinese tourists coming in to malaysia from 3 million last year.
malaysia rail link, the project's local partner, said in a statement that up to 70% of the workers will be local and that domestic contractors will get 40% of the civil works.
the belt and road initiative (bri) has been praised for its potential to speed up economic development in many developing countries but criticized for potentially saddling many of them with unsustainable debt.
malaysia's finance minister lim guan eng told reuters on monday that beijing had offered them more bri infrastructure investments and that kuala lumpur would consider them "if the pricing is right".
malaysia is already identifying new joint investment opportunities with china along the ecrl corridor, malaysian transport minister anthony loke said at the dungun event.
by agence france-pressemalaysia was once a loyal partner in china's globe-spanning infrastructure drive but a new government is now pledging to review beijing-backed projects, threatening key links in the much-vaunted initiative.
kuala lumpur's previous regime, led by scandal-mired najib razak, had warm ties with china and signed a string of deals for beijing-funded projects, including a major rail link and a deep-sea port.
but the long-ruling coalition was unexpectedly turfed out of power last month by voters disgusted at allegations of corruption and angered at rising living costs.
critics say many agreements lacked transparency, fuelling suspicions they were struck in exchange for help in paying off debts from a financial scandal which ultimately helped bring down najib's regime.
the new government, led by political heavyweight mahathir mohamad, has pledged to review chinese deals seen as dubious, calling into question malaysia's status as one of beijing's most cooperative partners in its infrastructure push.
china's ambitious initiative to revive ancient silk road trading routes with a global network of ports, roads and railways — dubbed "one belt, one road" — was launched in 2013 and is the economic crown jewel of president xi jinping's presidency.
malaysia, along with beijing ally cambodia, were seen as bright spots in southeast asia, with projects in other countries often facing problems, from land acquisition to drawn-out negotiations with governments.
"malaysia under najib moved quickly to approve and implement projects," murray hiebert, a senior associate from think-tank the center for strategic and international studies, told afp.
chinese foreign direct investment into malaysia stood at just 0.
8 percent of total net fdi inflows in 2008, but that figure had risen to 14.
4 percent by 2016, according to a study from singapore's iseas-yusof ishak institute.
however, hiebert said it was "widely assumed" that malaysia was striking quick deals with china in the hope of getting help to cover debts from sovereign wealth fund 1mdb.
najib and his cronies were accused of stealing huge sums of public money from the investment vehicle in a massive fraud.
public disgust at the allegations — denied by najib and 1mdb — helped topple his government.
– beijing's plans derailed?
–malaysia's first change of government in six decades has left najib facing a potential jail term — and appears to have already unsettled beijing's plans in the country.
new prime minister mahathir has announced a planned high-speed rail link between kuala lumpur and neighbouring singapore will not go ahead as he seeks to reduce the country's huge national debt.
the project was in its early stages and had not yet received any chinese funding as part of "one belt, one road".
but chinese companies were favoured to build part of the line, which would have constituted a link in a high-speed route from china's yunnan province to trading hub singapore, along which chinese goods could have been transported for export.
work has already started in malaysia on another line seen as part of that route, and which had received chinese funding — the $14-billion east coast rail link, running from close to the thai border to a port near kuala lumpur.
mahathir has said that agreement is now being renegotiated.
other chinese-funded initiatives include a deep-sea port in malacca, near important shipping routes, and an enormous industrial park.
it is not clear yet which projects will be changed or cancelled but experts believe axing some will be positive.
alex holmes, asia economist for capital economics, backed cancelling some initiatives, citing "malaysia's weak fiscal position and that some of the projects are of dubious economic value".
the chinese foreign ministry did not respond to request for comment.
but a recent commentary in china's global times, a nationalist state-run tabloid, warned mahathir if he damaged the interests of chinese companies, they had the right to seek compensation.
"the chinese government will also take concrete measures to safeguard the interests and rights of chinese enterprises," it said.
adding to china's woes, mahathir has a clear preference for beijing's rival japan, and last week went to tokyo for his first foreign trip since taking office.
during the visit, the 92-year-old signalled ties with beijing would cool: "we will be friendly with china, but we do not want to be indebted to china. "
by agence france-pressemalaysia's ousted leader has denied wrongdoing over a $2.
4 billion china-backed pipeline deal after the new government said the project was "highly suspicious" and linked it to a massive financial scandal.
a company owned by malaysia's finance ministry signed the 9.
4-billion ringgit deal in 2016 for a chinese state-owned company to build a gas pipeline and an oil pipeline.
najib razak — toppled in elections last month — was prime minister at the time, and battling allegations billions of dollars were looted from sovereign wealth fund 1mdb.
the pipeline deal was one of a series of big-ticket, beijing-backed projects signed during najib's leadership, fuelling suspicions china was helping the scandal-mired leader pay off debts racked up by the stricken fund.
malaysia's finance minister lim guan eng said tuesday that 8.
25 billion ringgit had already been drawn down by the chinese company building the pipelines.
this amounted to almost 88 percent of the project value — yet only 13 percent of the work had been completed, he said in a statement.
lim said he had instructed officials to file a report about the "highly suspicious transactions" with anti-corruption authorities and noted that the company behind the deal had links to a scandal-mired, former subsidiary of 1mdb.
"we have documents to prove.
.
.
it's all part of the 1mdb scam," the minister was cited as saying in the star newspaper.
state-owned export-import bank of china provided 85 percent of the funding for the project with the rest required to be raised by issuing sukuk, or islamic bonds, lim said.
najib insisted in a statement late tuesday there was no wrongdoing in the project, saying he and chinese premier li keqiang witnessed the signing of memoranda of understanding for the deal in beijing in 2017. the toppled leader, who has been questioned twice by graft investigators since losing power, said he was "confident" that all necessary "procedures and laws have been complied with" in the deal.
he said "great care" should be taken "when making such serious politically-motivated public allegations involving foreign state-owned companies as it may have a negative effect on foreign relations and international trade".
public disgust over allegations of corruption linked to najib and his cronies was a major factor in his surprise election loss last month to an alliance headed by mahathir mohamad.
