As Asia's 'travel bubbles' fail to materialize, travelers face prospect of long winter at home.
the highly-anticipated hong kong and singapore "air travel bubble" was postponed saturday -- less than 24 hours before it was due to launch.
the bubble would have allowed quarantine-free, air travel between the two asian hubs.
but a spike in coronavirus infections in hong kong means the arrangement will be postponed for two weeks, said edward yau, hong kong's secretary for commerce and economic development, at a press conference saturday.
hong kong reported 43 new coronavirus cases on saturday, the highest daily spike in over three months.
among them, 36 were locally transmitted -- including 13 that are untraceable.
the quarantine-free corridor was meant to boost tourism and business travel between the two asian hubs, which have largely contained their coronavirus outbreak.
hong kong has recorded 5,561 covid-19 cases, including 108 deaths, since the outbreak began, while singapore has reported 58,000 infections and 28 deaths.
quarantine-free travel would have been a big deal for both destinations, where strict arrival regulations have been in place for months.
when the coronavirus pandemic hit, both governments shut borders and denied entry to most non-residents and short-term visitors.
in hong kong, returning residents are required to undergo a 14-day quarantine and wear an electronic bracelet to track their location.
how the bubble was meant to work the bubble was set to begin sunday with one flight a day into each city, with a quota of 200 travelers per flight -- and later set increased to two flights a day.
travelers would have to meet certain parameters before embarking, such as having made no trips in the previous 14 days, and undergo compulsory covid-19 testing.
but they wouldn't be subject to any quarantine or stay-home notice requirements, or a controlled itinerary, upon arrival.
however, the arrangement always included the caveat that should the covid-19 situation deteriorate in either city, the plan would be suspended.
singapore's civil aviation authority initially announced on saturday morning that the travel bubble with hong kong would be launched as scheduled.
but later that day, the city-state's transport minister ong ye kung announced there had been a change of plan.
"given the evolving situation in hong kong, secretary edward yau and i discussed further this afternoon, and decided that it would be better to defer the launch of the atb, by two weeks.
we will review within two weeks on the new launch date and update again," ong said.
hong kong has seen a sharp rise in coronavirus infections in the past few days, after weeks of steadily low number of cases.
the city's centre for health protection "strongly urged" the public to avoid all non-essential travel outside hong kong, and called on residents to avoid going out, dining out and having social contact.
"the scale of the increase is very alarming," chuang shuk-kwan, head of the communicable disease branch at hong kong's centre for health protection said on saturday.
she warned that this new increase in cases will be "very difficult to control. "
countries around the world are imposing bans and restrictions on travel from the united kingdom to stem the transmission of a coronavirus variant that health authorities say can spread faster than others.
the new variant discovered in the uk prompted authorities to impose a tier 4 lockdown in london and southeast england and tighten restrictions for all of england over the festive period.
since the uk lockdown was announced on saturday, over 40 countries in europe, asia, south america, the caribbean and the middle east have restricted travel from the uk and in some cases, also travel from other countries that have documented cases with the variant.
the variant has also been detected in denmark, the netherlands and australia, according to the world health organization.
in south africa, a different coronavirus variant has been reported, the who's technical lead for covid-19, maria van kerkhove, said monday.
the uk foreign, commonwealth and development office (fcdo) is working to support british nationals affected by the travel disruptions caused by the new restrictions, which have cut off uk travelers from much of europe and other parts of the world.
the united states had not issued a ban on travel from the uk as of thursday morning.
however, new york mayor bill de blasio announced on wednesday that uk travelers arriving in the city will be required to quarantine or face a daily $1,000 fine.
the move comes days after new york governor andrew cuomo called for either a ban on travel from the uk or mandatory testing of passengers, while airlines delta, british airways and virgin atlantic agreed to a testing mandate for passengers boarding flights between the uk and new york city.
us assistant secretary for health admiral brett giroir told cnn that as of monday morning, there weren't plans for us restrictions on travel to or from the uk because of the new coronavirus variant, but "everything is possible, we just need to put everything on the table, have an open scientific discussion and make a best recommendation. "
"cdc is following the situation closely and actively assessing the implications of the new variant and response options with respect to international travel," according to a statement from the us centers for disease control and prevention.
countries banning travel  argentina according to a joint statement published sunday by the argentinian health and interior ministries, argentina was to allow only one more flight from britain to land at the international airport in buenos aires on monday morning.
later flights have been canceled.
belgium from december 23 to 31, only residents of belgium will be allowed to enter the country.
non-residents can enter from january 1,  provided they supply evidence of a negative covid-19 test taken no more than 48 hours prior to their arrival .
bulgaria prime minister boyko borissov convened a working meeting on sunday with members of his cabinet in response to the new variant, during which it was decided to temporarily suspend air travel between bulgaria and the united kingdom starting monday until january 31, 2021, his office said.
brazil  brazil has placed a temporary ban, which will come into effect on friday, on all flights originating from the uk or passing through.
foreigners who have been in the uk during the past 14 days are all blocked from entering the south american country.
canada canada has extended its ban on passenger travel from the uk until january 6, 2021.  canadian prime minister justin trudeau confirmed the news in a press conference on wednesday.
the measure was initially put in place for at least 72 hours beginning midnight sunday.
chile the chilean government announced that all flights to and from the uk will be suspended beginning on tuesday, and that travelers who have been to the uk in the past 14 days would have to self-quarantine.
china china is suspending direct flights to and from the united kingdom from thursday.
the announcement was made by foreign ministry spokesman wang wenbin, who said officials were taking "reference from other countries. "
colombia colombian president ivan duque announced that all flights between colombia and the uk will be suspended, starting on monday.
travelers who have been to the uk in the past 14 days will also have to self-quarantine upon entering colombia, duque told reporters.
czech republic the czech government was halting flights from the uk as of 6 a. m.  et monday in reaction to the new variant of the coronavirus in the uk, a government statement said.
dominican republic the dominican republic has suspended all "aerial operations" between the island and the uk starting monday until january 10.  all other operations such as emergency flights, cargo and airmail will not be affected by the mandate.
the government has also introduced a mandatory seven-day quarantine period for travellers with journeys originating in the uk.
travelers will be required to undertake a pcr test while in quarantine.
el salvador el salvador is banning anyone entering the country from the uk and south africa.
estonia the government of estonia announced a suspension of air traffic between estonia and the uk on sunday, which will last until the end of the year.
france french prime minister jean castex has eased restrictions days after announcing a 48-hour ban on the movement of people from the uk to france starting sunday night and applying to all methods of transport.
freight drivers and some passengers will now be allowed to enter if they can provide proof of a negative covid test taken less than 72 hours before departure.
germany the german government is restricting travel to and from the uk and south africa because of the new coronavirus variant.
grenada grenada has suspended all flights to and from the uk until further notice.
additionally, anyone who has been in the uk within the past 14 days will not be allowed entry into the country.
guatemala in guatemala, health authorities announced on monday travelers from the uk are prohibited from entering the country due to the new variant of covid-19 detected.
guatemala's health minister said further details on the new restrictions for travelers from the uk will be announced wednesday.
hong kong hong kong will ban all passengers who stayed in the united kingdom for more than two hours in the past 14 days from arriving in the city starting tuesday, secretary for food and health sophia chan said during a monday press conference.
india flights between india and the united kingdom are suspended until the end of 2020, the indian ministry of civil aviation said on monday.
passengers arriving in india from the uk before december 22 are required to take a mandatory rt-pcr test.
iran iran announced the suspension of flights to and from the uk for two weeks on sunday.
israel israel's government has banned flights from the uk, denmark and south africa.
italy italy is suspending flights between the country and the united kingdom because of the new coronavirus variant identified in england, italian minister for foreign affairs luigi di maio announced on sunday.
jamaica jamaica has banned all flights coming from the uk until january 4, although those due to arrive tuesday will be accepted, the ministry of health and wellness has said.
passengers on those flights will be pcr tested on arrival and quarantined for at least 48 hours in government accommodation.
those testing negative will receive armbands to complete a 14-day quarantine at home.
those testing positive will be quarantined by the state until their recovery.
jordan the government has decided to suspend all direct and indirect (transit) passenger flights from the united kingdom starting monday and lasting through january 3, 2021, according to a statement from jordanian government spokesman and minister of state for media affairs ali al-ayed.
kuwait kuwait has suspended flights arriving from the united kingdom starting monday.
latvia latvia has suspended travel to and from the uk from december 21 to january 1, the latvian ministry of transportation announced in a statement on sunday.
lithuania fights from the uk will be suspended, lithuania's prime minister tweeted.
luxembourg luxembourg has temporarily suspended flights from the uk after a new variant of coronavirus was found there, according to a government statement sunday.
morocco morocco suspended flights to and from the united kingdom starting sunday night (december 20), morocco state news agency (map) reported.
netherlands the netherlands will ban all passenger flights coming from the united kingdom.
north macedonia the prime minister of north macedonia has announced that flight restrictions to the uk will be unveiled imminently.
oman oman will shut down its air, sea and land borders starting tuesday, december 22, for one week to monitor the new variant of coronavirus reported by the united kingdom, oman state news agency reported.
pakistan pakistan is suspending direct or indirect travel from the united kingdom into the country.
according to a statement released by the pakistan aviation ministry the suspension will be in effect from december 23-30.  repatriation flights to the uk are available, however.
the ban will be reviewed december 28.     panama starting at 11:59pm et on monday, panama will temporarily suspend the entrance of people who have stayed or transited in the uk or south africa in the past 20 days.
peru peruvian president francisco sagasti announced a ban on flights coming from europe for two weeks as a preventive measure.
he also announced a ban on foreigners coming to peru if they have been in the uk for the last two weeks.
poland flights to and from the uk have been suspended until at least january 6.  republic of ireland the government for the republic of ireland has extended its ban on flights from britain until december 31.  the temporary measure was initially put in place for two days from sunday.
russia russia is suspending flights to and from the uk for a week starting at midnight moscow time on december 22, state-run news agency ria novosti reported, citing russian coronavirus response headquarters.
saudi arabia starting monday, all international flights are suspended for seven days -- except in exceptional cases, saudi arabia's general authority of civil aviation (gaca) has announced.
the temporary ban can be extended for another week.
spain spain's government, in coordination with portugal, will refuse entry to travelers from the uk starting tuesday, spain's la moncloa announced monday afternoon.
spanish citizens and residents are exempt.
the government also announced it will reinforce border controls at gibraltar.
sweden sweden has amended its entry ban on travel from the uk to allow residents to return to the country.
the swedish government released a statement on wednesday, which confirmed that those w
with the end of the year approaching, travelers holding onto hope they may still get to enjoy a quick winter escape in asia are facing some hard truths right now.
christmas on the beach in phuket?
highly unlikely -- unless you're willing to quarantine in a hotel for two weeks first.
lunar new year in bali next february?
don't book those flights just yet.
the list of countries in the region that are off limits to most leisure travel remains long and, according to the experts, is likely to remain that way for some time yet.
in early may, optimism was high that once governments were able to contain their covid-19 outbreaks they would begin opening up to other nations that too had a handle on their case numbers.
dubbed "travel bubbles," the concept was first raised by australia and new zealand, then quickly picked up by other nations as a possible way to get international travelers flying again.
this would give tourism-dependent economies a chance to recoup the millions of dollars in losses racked up this year.
for a number of reasons, those bubbles -- also called air corridors -- have yet to materialize in asia.
in what's been referred to as a twisted game of "whack-a-mole," the virus continues to rear its invisible head in fresh waves, leading most governments to shy away from actually moving beyond the discussion phase.
"travel bubbles are extremely complex to implement, much greater than what people may have thought originally," says mario hardy, ceo of the pacific asia travel association (pata).
"each respective destination needs to have well tested and tried protocols and the understanding that visitors from each country will respect them.
they also need to ensure that they have a robust health care system to handle any potential resurgences of cases as well as good contact tracing capabilities. "
thailand announces long-stay tourist visa   that's not to say baby steps aren't being taken.
almost daily, new headlines announce the lifting of travel restrictions in the region, as well as the resumption of international flights.
but if you look at the fine print, few of these changes mean much for leisure travelers, but rather apply to business travelers and foreign residents.
"i think the idea that we're going to go back to borders being thrown open any time soon is just not going to happen," says gary bowerman, founder of check-in asia, a tourism-focused research and marketing company.
the pressure to stem the economic loss while balancing the risk of a virus resurgence remains heavy.
in addition to nations being afraid they will import further cases of covid-19 by opening the doors to tourists, bowerman points out that "it's very difficult to get other countries to agree to let travelers come because they know at some point they're going to be coming back and could reimport the virus. "
australia, for instance, has some of the strictest rules in the world, banning its citizens from traveling abroad for leisure tourism.
thousands of australians are now stranded overseas due to a cap on international arrivals, with only 4,000 allowed in per week.
bowerman says singapore is leading the way in southeast asia when it comes to the gradual opening of borders.
the city-state has set up fast tracks for short-term business travelers, allowing visitors from specific countries to avoid quarantine.
but even then, "they're saying general travel is unlikely until even the second quarter of next year," he notes.
in terms of which countries face the most pressure to reopen, eunice aw, singapore director of global hospitality consulting firm horwath htl, singles out thailand.
"thailand's travel business is probably one of the hardest hit among the southeast asian countries given that it welcomed the highest number of international visitors, at close to 40 million, in 2019," she tells cnn travel.
"well-known for its cuisine, culture and beaches, it has been a perennial favorite with tourists from all over the globe. "
according to the world bank, tourism normally makes up nearly 15% of thailand's gdp.
the country has fared well in the battle against coronavirus, going 101 days without reporting a locally transmitted case, until early september.
it remains closed to international tourists, but that could soon change.
the government announced last week it's creating a special 90-day long-stay visa for international tourists, a plan it hopes to implement by october.
deputy government spokesperson traisuree taisaranakul says the special tourism visa will be available for foreigners intending to stay in thailand for a long period and will cost 2,000 baht ($64).
requirements include quarantining in a hotel room or hospital for 14 days.
tourism authority of thailand governor suttasak supasorn tells cnn travel any hotel can receive these special tourists, "as long as they are certified by the ministry of public health. "
"we hope to start this as soon as october but this also depends on the demand side as well," he says.
once travelers complete their 14 days of quarantine and their covid-19 test is negative, they can travel all around thailand.
"after the end of quarantine, they will be treated just like thai nationals who return from abroad," says suttasak.
"we have received some positive interest, especially from the european market.
our representatives around the world have received enquiries. "
elsewhere in the region: a mixed response to reopening prior to the pandemic, vietnam was one of the region's fastest growing tourism destinations.
according to a 2019 report from the world bank, it capitalized on surging global and regional demand over the previous three years, allowing it to achieve record growth in terms of both international and domestic visitors.
"more than 15 million foreigners now visit vietnam each year, compared to only 4 million a decade ago, alongside roughly 80 million domestic traveler-trips, which have similarly quadrupled in number over the past 10 years," said the report.
in recent days, vietnam's government has expressed an interest in opening air corridors with its neighbors, but nothing concrete has been announced as of yet.
international commercial flights into vietnam from several asian destinations resumed this month, however, the flights are not yet open to leisure tourists.
meanwhile, hong kong officials confirmed to cnn travel that they're exploring possible travel corridors with 11 countries that have close economic/tourism ties and where the epidemic has stabilized.
these are: japan, thailand, south korea, australia, new zealand, germany, france, switzerland, vietnam, malaysia and singapore.
an inter-departmental team has reportedly been set up to discuss the proposal with the countries on its list.
but proving just how challenging it is to actually solidify such proposals, officials from south korea's tourism ministry told cnn travel that they have no plans to reopen to international tourism yet and there are no plans or discussions about a possible travel bubble, either.
as for japan -- another travel favorite that was gearing up for a huge tourism windfall following years of preparations to host the now postponed summer olympics -- no leisure tourism reopening plans have been announced.
the country has only just started allowing reentry to some foreign residents.
the indonesian island of bali, meanwhile, had planned to reopen to international tourism on september 11, which would have allowed them to capitalize on the chinese golden week holiday in early october.
but that plan was shelved as covid-19 cases continued to rise in the country.
"you can set a hard deadline to try to reopen tourism, but you've still got to negotiate the agreement in the current context for people to come," says bowerman.
"the problem was that bali doesn't really set the reopening rules -- that's the indonesian government.
they'd have to negotiate with the chinese government and the chinese government clearly was not going to allow its tourists to go to indonesia when the case rates are so high. "
chinese tourists staying home china recovered from the virus relatively quickly due to its strict lockdown measures, though blips have occurred, such as a fresh outbreak in beijing in june.
prior to covid-19 grounding all tourists, china was the world's largest market for outbound travel, leaping from 4.
5 million travelers in 2000 to 150 million in 2018.  the country accounted for $277 billion or 16% of the world's total $1.
7 trillion international tourism spending, according to the unwto.
now, with the virus under control, they're traveling within their own borders as those who do head overseas have to quarantine for 14 days upon their return.
travel analytics company forward keys released a report in august predicting that domestic air travel in china would reach a full recovery by the start of september.
"in the second week of august, domestic arrivals at chinese airports reached 86% of 2019 levels and bookings (issued air tickets) hit 98%, with most being for travel in mid to late august," said the report.
however, those hoping chinese tourists will be ready to head abroad for the 2021 february spring festival/lunar new year period are likely out of luck.
"in my personal opinion, i believe mainland chinese travelers will likely spend their new year traveling domestically and that international destinations won't benefit from the vast amount of overseas trips from china until 2022," says pata's hardy.
maldives defies the norm not everyone is keeping their doors shut to international tourists.
the maldives is a rare outlier in that it's now welcoming all visitors, from all countries, with no quarantine restrictions.
the island nation reopened on july 15.  visitors are only allowed on the resort islands, and they need to book their entire stay in one registered establishment.
initially, medical certificates showing a negative covid-19 pcr test were not required, but the government changed that rule from september 11, due to a rise in case numbers.
the country is in a far better position than most to isolate visitors.
the maldives is made up of 26 atolls filled with over 1,000 islands occupied by dozens of resorts, all spread out over 90,000 square kilometers.
most of the islands developed for tourism feature just a single resort.
this means if guests or staff come into contact with someone who tests positive for covid-19, in theory they will be easily traceable, while the potential for spread is kept to a minimum.
europe's summer experiment asia's cautious approach to reopening contrasts starkly with that of europe, where many countries opened their borders in june to ensure tourism businesses would have some income over the popular summer months.
a recent report by the unwto states that 115 destinations (53% of all destinations worldwide) have eased covid-19 relate
it's quite the cocktail.
with more than half the planet's population, massive infrastructure projects and rapid growth in air connectivity, the asia-pacific region is attracting more international tourists than any other part of the world.
the unwto puts the total tourism earnings from asian countries at a cool us$390 billion, much of which comes from the hotel sector.
no surprise, then, that pretty much every asia-pacific destination you can think of seems to be opening new places to stay.
we've already told you about the recent openings we're excited about.
now, here are some of the hottest new spots around the region due to open -- and in one case, reopen -- for business in 2019.  raffles hotel, singapore arguably one of the most famous names in asian hospitality, raffles hotel singapore is set to re-open in mid-2019 following an extensive top-to-bottom renovation.
new features include dining concepts by globally renowned celebrity chefs like alain ducasse, new categories of suites and a brand new raffles spa.
there's 24-hour butler service and a singapore sling cocktail served to all guests on arrival, while a history gallery illustrates the property's heritage dating back to 1887.  raffles hotel singapore has begun accepting suite reservations.
raffles hotel singapore, 1 beach rd, singapore; +65 6337 1886 the barracks hotel, singapore another heritage building in singapore undergoing a meticulous restoration is a former military outpost dating back to 1904.    the barracks hotel at sentosa, an island off singapore's southern coast, offers 40 guestrooms and suites that promise elegant décor and the luxury of space.
one key feature is set to be their pool -- always a welcome feature in a tropical climate -- which sits amid their tranquil gardens.
ground floor suites have direct access for taking a dip.
the barracks hotel, 2 gunner lane, sentosa island, singapore; +65 6512 2202  capella bangkok bangkok is one of the world's greatest hotel cities, offering rooms at every conceivable price point.
at the very top end of the scale, the "ultra-luxury" capella on the banks of the chao phraya river is set to join the list.
opening in the second quarter of 2019, it will offer 100 guest rooms and villas that all boast views of the bustling and iconic waterway below.
gourmet restaurants include one from renowned michelin-starred chef mauro colagreco, while a 9,000 sq.
ft.  auriga spa and pool will provide plenty of chances for serious downtime.
capella bangkok, 300 charoenkrung road,yannawa, sathorn, bangkok, thailand; +66 2 658 7888 rosewood bangkok moving to another prime location in the thai capital, rosewood bangkok is located in heart of the central business district, amidst embassies and upscale retail options.
the property will offer 159 guestrooms that include pool sky villas featuring large terraces and private plunge pools.
three restaurants and bars, meeting and function spaces and an extensive rosewood spa complete the picture.
panoramic views of bangkok's iconic skyline come as standard, especially from the sky villa event venue on the top floor.
rosewood bangkok, 1041/38 ploenchit road, bangkok +852 2138 2222 four seasons bangkok at chao phraya river the third quarter of 2019 is when the four seasons hotel bangkok at chao phraya river is due to start receiving guests.
the nine acre waterside site will host an architecturally striking property designed to integrate seamlessly into the landscape.
with 299 keys -- that's rooms and suites to those not in the industry -- the property is positioning itself as an urban resort experience.
that's thanks in part to a series of uniquely designed green courtyards that thread through the site.
three restaurants will focus on italian, french and chinese cuisine, as well as a latin american inspired social club and bar.
four seasons bangkok at chao phraya river, 300 charoenkrung road, yannawa, sathorn, bangkok; +66 2 043 0888  waldorf astoria maldives the maldives is home to some of the world's most stunning islands and beaches.
joining the already wide range of luxury properties here is the waldorf astoria maldives ithaafushi, a tropical retreat of 121 oversized villas spread across no fewer than three islands in the south malé atoll.
each has an infinity pool and stunning ocean views.
meanwhile, amongst their 10 dining venues, the instagram-worthy award will surely go to their elevated treetop restaurant.
water sports and spa treatments are set to round off your trip to paradise.
this one is opening in april.
and unlike many maldives resorts, you don't need to take a sea plane to get there.
it's just 30 minutes from male international airport by yacht.
waldorf astoria maldives ithaafushi, south male atoll, male, maldives; +960 4 000300 lelewatu sumba island indonesia the indonesian island of sumba may lack the recognition of bali or lombok, but its relatively unknown status helps make it a draw for high-end travelers.
rich culture, deserted beaches and some of the country's best surfing spots are partly why lelewatu resort sumba will debut there later this year.
just 27 villas occupy a 10-acre site, each of which are made with authentic local materials, handicrafts and techniques.
views from the clifftop residences look out over both a private lagoon and the indian ocean, making for picture-perfect sunsets.
lelewatu resort sumba, jl.
lelewatu no.
168 wei mangoma, kecamatan, wanokaka, sumba barat, nusa tenggara timur, indonesia; +62 361 233 708 art series hotel brisbane  the art series hotels brand recently joined accorhotels and their forthcoming opening in brisbane's howard smith wharves -- opening in march -- is their eighth property.
an estimated $60 million has been spent on the hotel, which has been partly built into a cliff under the city's story bridge.
it features 166 guest rooms, four dining outlets and a pool on the rooftop looking out over the brisbane river below.
the skyline of the capital of the state of queensland can also be seen from rooms across the six stories, each of which celebrates contemporary australian artists.
art series hotel brisbane, 5 boundary st, brisbane city qld; +61 2 9280 2133 mandarin oriental wangfujing, beijing the acclaimed luxury hospitality brand mandarin oriental is set to open their first hotel in the chinese capital early this year with the launch of mandarin oriental wangfujing, beijing.
the property occupies the top floors of the new wf central development, giving it outstanding views of landmarks across the city, including the forbidden city.
just 74 spacious guestrooms and suites are elegantly styled, while garden terraces evoke grand residences from centuries past.
dining options include their signature mandarin grill + bar and casual asian plates at café zi.
mandarin oriental wangfujing, no.
269 wangfujing street, beijing, china; +86 10 8509 8888 st.  regis hong kong the first st.  regis brand to launch in hong kong is located in the city's always-bustling wan chai district.
hong kong-based interior designer andré fu has created the interiors of the 129-suite property, due to open in mid-2019.
.
one of the st.  regis' biggest draws will be its views over iconic victoria harbor and kowloon bay, but eyes will also be drawn to the two signature chinese and french restaurants, rùn and l'envol respectively.
there's also a pool, open-air terrace and st.  regis bar serving their signature bloody mary, while butler service reflects the traditions laid down by the first st.  regis hotel opening in new york, back in 1904.  the st.  regis hong kong, 26 harbour rd, wan chai, hong kong;  rosewood hong kong the hong kong hotel for 2019 with views to beat all newcomers must be the rosewood hong kong.
as the luxury brand debuts in its home city -- its owned by hong kong hotel-and-property company new world development  -- those panoramas come thanks to the hotel occupying 43 floors of a waterfront tower in the victoria dockside arts, design and retail district in the heart of tsim sha tsui.
opening march 17, it features 322 guestrooms sized from 570 sq.
ft, as well as 91 suites starting at 990 sq.
ft, making them some of the city's largest.
for those for whom budget is not a concern, then the 10,764 sq.
ft harbour house on the 57th floor should do nicely, complete with its own pool, gym and gardens.
eight dining concepts and a spa are set to make the property as popular with locals as with visitors.
rosewood hong kong, victoria dockside, 18 salisbury road, tsim sha tsui, kowloon, hong kong; +852 3891 8888 hoshinoya guguan, taiwan the traditional ryokan inn has been welcoming japanese travelers for centuries, but hoshinoya has made a name for itself by offering a contemporary take on these gracious accommodation options.
the japan-based brand is set to launch its first taiwan property in taiwan in the summer.
luxury hot springs resort hoshinoya guguan sits in a valley surrounded by mountains.
guests are first led through a bamboo forest before reaching a futuristic reception area and enjoying the cuisine, service and local touches that define a ryokan.
hoshinoya guguan, no.
16, wenquan ln.
, sec.
1, dongguan rd.
, heping dist.
, taichung city, taiwan, +81 50 3786 1144  the chedi mumbai, india  the powai district of mumbai, india's beguiling and most populous city, is changing rapidly and the chedi mumbai is contributing to the momentum with its 312 guestrooms.
many overlook powai lake and the city's skyline.
an exceptional line-up of dining options include their all-day dining spot called the vegetarian, a japanese restaurant by renowned michelin-starred chef hide yamamoto and even a spot inspired by switzerland, the chesa.
spa and wellness facilities help guests work off any dining excesses.
the chedi mumbai, lbs marg & jvlr junction, kanjurmarg west, mumbai, india; +91 22 6731 5555 the puxuan hotel and spa, beijing another one to watch in the chinese capital, the puxuan hotel and spa, beijing is set in the heart of the commercial district.
a 116-room luxury property opening this month, it offers views across the forbidden city, while its interior design brings a modern take on the old "hutong" alleyways that used to dot the city.
unique features include a guarantee that you can check-in at any time during the 24 hours of your stay, while chinese culture and arts permeate the property and reflect local heritage.
a complimentary mini bar should also ensure downtime is well spent, too.
the puxuan hotel and spa, beijing, 1 wangfujing street, dongcheng district, beijing, china; +86 010 5393 6688
before covid-19 struck, the world was enjoying greater freedom of movement than at any time in history.
air traffic had been rising steadily for decades and the average passport-holder worldwide was enjoying visa-free or visa-on-arrival access to 107 global destinations.
and then came the travel bans.
the henley passport index, which periodically measures the world's most travel-friendly passports, has just released its third report of the new decade.
asian citizens continue to have the travel documents that open the most doors.
japan is top of the leaderboard, offering visa-free or visa-on-arrival access to 191 destinations around the world.
singapore is in second place (with a score of 190) and south korea ties with germany in third place (with a score of 189).
the standard ranking, however does not take temporary bans into account -- and that, says henley & partners in a release, is where the juiciest details lie: "it is eye-opening to consider what travel freedom currently looks like for the holders of once-prestigious passports. "
last week, the eu released its list of the 14 countries whose residents would be allowed entry into bloc from july 1,  months after it shut its external borders in response to the outbreak of covid-19.
japan and south korea made the grade when it came to the eu's coronavirus-related health and safety criteria, as did australia and canada (in joint ninth place on the henley passport index).
however, notes henley & partner's, "in a move perceived as a stinging rebuke for its poor handling of the pandemic," the united states was a notable exclusion, alongside brazil and russia.
the united states is currently placed seventh in official index, but under the current eu ban, americans have around the same level of travel freedom as citizens of mexico (no.
25 on henley passport index, with a score of 159) and uruguay (no.
28, with a score of 153).
likewise, brazil's absence from the list of countries welcomed by the european union means that, while its official henley ranking is no.
19, the current reality is that it ranks somewhere closer to paraguay (36th on the index, with a score of 142).
singapore, meanwhile, is at no.
2 on the henley passport index but its exclusion from the eu list means that its passport-holders currently have much less travel freedom than the other countries on the top podium: japan, south korea and germany.
christian h.  kaelin, chair of henley & partners and the inventor of the passport index concept, says the impact of the eu's recent decision will be far-reaching.
"as we have already seen, the pandemic's impact on travel freedom has been more drastic and long-lasting than initially anticipated.
this latest decision by the eu indicates that there is more upheaval to come. "
the best passports to hold in 2020 are: 1.  japan (191 destinations) 2.  singapore (190) 3.  south korea, germany (189) 4.  italy, finland, spain, luxembourg (188) 5.  denmark, austria (187) 6.  sweden, france, portugal, netherlands, ireland (186) 7.  switzerland, united states, united kingdom, norway, belgium (185) 8.  greece, new zealand, malta, czech republic (184) 9.  canada, australia (183) 10.  hungary (181) the worst passports to hold several countries around the world have visa-free or visa-on-arrival access to fewer than 40 countries.
these include: 103.  north korea (39 destinations) 104.  libya, nepal, palestinian territory (38) 105.  somalia, yemen (33) 106.  pakistan (32) 107.  syria (29) 108.  iraq (28) 109.  afghanistan (26) other indexes henley & partner's list is one of several indexes created by financial firms to rank global passports according to the access they provide to their citizens.
the henley passport index is based on data provided by the international air transport authority (iata) and covers 199 passports and 227 travel destinations.
it is updated in real time throughout the year, as and when visa policy changes come into effect.
arton capital's passport index takes into consideration the passports of 193 united nations member countries and six territories -- roc taiwan, macau (sar china), hong kong (sar china), kosovo, palestinian territory and the vatican.
territories annexed to other countries are excluded.
its 2020 index puts japan and new zealand at the top, with a visa-free score of 118.
