Myanmar junta moves civilian leader Aung San Suu Kyi, ex-president Win Myint to 'unknown location', SE Asia News & Top Stories.
shanghai: china president xi jinping said that the country must improve the way it tells its "stories" to a global audience as it seeks to develop an international voice that reflects its status on the world stage, official news agency xinhua reported.
speaking at a communist party study meeting, xi said it was crucial for china to improve its ability to spread its messages globally in order to present a "true, three-dimensional and comprehensive china", xinhua said on tuesday (jun 1).
china needed to develop an "international voice" to match its national strength and global status, xinhua said, citing xi.
it also needed to strengthen propaganda efforts to help foreigners understand the chinese communist party and the way it "strives for the happiness of the chinese people".
the country needed to create a team of professionals and adopt "precise communication methods" for different regions, he said.
china's relationship with foreign media has become increasingly tense in recent years, with local news outlets such as the global times often singling out foreign reporters for what it says is biased and unfair coverage.
several journalists working for united states news organisations were expelled last year as relations between the two sides deteriorated.
china has also banned bbc world news from mainland chinese television networks following criticism of the british broadcaster's coverage of human rights in the north-western region of xinjiang as well as the origins of the covid-19 pandemic.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore: singapore reported 15 new covid-19 community cases as of noon on tuesday (jun 1), including seven with no links to previous cases.
eight were linked to previous cases, with six already on quarantine and two detected through surveillance, said the ministry of health (moh).
there were also three imported cases, who had been placed on stay-home notice upon arrival in singapore.
no new infections were reported in migrant workers' dormitories.
in all, singapore reported 18 new covid-19 cases on tuesday.
closure of hua zai outletsmoh said it is investigating cases of covid-19 infection among people who work athua zai outletsas epidemiological investigations have found that there is "likely ongoing transmission".
the hua zai outlet in ntuc foodfare (308 anchorvale road) has been closed since may 30, following the detection of cases linked to the coffee shop.
to break any potential chain of transmission and enable deep cleaning of the premises, moh said all 26 hua zai outlets will be closed to the public for two weeks from tuesday.
they will reopen on jun 15.
7 unlinked casesa 37-year-old singaporean who is a resident at mindsville@napiri is among the seven unlinked cases.
the woman developed a runny nose and cough on may 29 and subsequently a fever on may 30.  she was taken to a polyclinic the next day, where she underwent both an antigen rapid test (art) and polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test.
both tests came back positive for covid-19 on may 31 and her serology test result is pending.
the other cases include a 46-year-old singaporean who works as a front desk staff member at hotel boss and a 29-year-old malaysian who works as a "car park roving officer" at top parking, said moh.
there is also a 26-year-old malaysian who works as a delivery rider for pizza hut (hougang green) and a 72-year-old singaporean who is employed by smn elite security as a security guard at shriro house (11 chang charn road).
the remaining two unlinked cases are a 56-year-old singaporean homemaker and an 82-year-old singaporean retiree.
all of the unlinked cases experienced symptoms such as fever, body aches, shortness of breath or loss of taste prior to testing positive for covid-19.
hong ye group cleaners cluster growsa 17-year-old singaporean who works at ang mo kio-thye hua kwan hospital has been linked to the hong ye group cleaners cluster, which now has a total of 22 infections.
the teenager, known as case 63929, last went to work on may 28.  she is a close contact of a previously confirmed case, an 18-year-old singaporean who is a full-time national serviceman at the civil defence academy.
case 63929 developed a fever and sore throat on may 30 but did not seek medical treatment until may 31 when she visited a clinic and was tested for covid-19.
her test result came back positive for covid-19 on the same day and her serology test result is pending.
new clustersthree new clusters have been identified.
two new cases reported on tuesday have been linked to the case 63887 cluster, which now has three infections.
case 63887, a 65-year-old singaporean who is a homemaker, was confirmed to have covid-19 on may 30. among the two new cases linked to this cluster is a four-year-old singaporean student at my first skool at block 332b anchorvale link.
the girl was last in school on may 12.  she developed a cough and a fever on may 26 and may 27 respectively, and sought medical treatment at a clinic on may 28. as she had been identified as a close contact of case 63887, she was quarantined on may 30 and was tested for covid-19 on the same day.
her test result came back positive for covid-19 on may 31 and her serology test result is pending.
the other case linked to case 63887 is a 27-year-old malaysian homemaker.
she developed a fever and cough during quarantine and tested positive for covid-19 on may 31. the second new cluster is linked to case 63399, a 35-year-old malaysian who is a kitchen crew member at kota zheng zong bak kut teh (serangoon gardens).
the new case in this cluster is a 29-year-old malaysian who works as a waitress at chir chir restaurant at bugis junction.
this brings the total number of cases in this cluster to three.
the third new cluster is linked to case 63743, a 24-year-old malaysian who works at mcdonald's (the woodgrove).
the new case in this cluster is a 28-year-old malaysian who works as a waiter at acid bar.
he was last at work on may 16.  this brings the total number of cases in this cluster to three.
two-year-old girl among community casesa two-year-old singaporean who is a student at carpe diem at 2 ang mo kio drive has been added to the cluster linked to a 31-year-old singaporean man who works as a property agent with era realty network.
the cluster has now grown to seven cases.
the girl is a family member of three previously confirmed covid-19 cases and was last in school on may 14.  she was quarantined on may 24 and tested negative for covid-19 on may 30. she was asymptomatic and was detected when she was tested again on may 31 during quarantine.
her serology test result is positive.
a 39-year-old singaporean homemaker has been linked to the tektronix cluster.
she is a family member and household contact of a previously confirmed case.
the woman was quarantined on may 25.  she was tested for covid-19 on may 26 and her result came back negative on the same day.
she developed a fever on may 31 and was again tested for covid-19.
her result came back positive on the same day and her serology test result is pending.
the remaining linked case is a 30-year-old singaporean man who works as a technician at st engineering innosparks.
he is a family member and household contact of a previously confirmed case.
the man developed a fever and cough on may 30 and sought medical treatment at a polyclinic the next day, where he underwent both an art and pcr test.
he was immediately isolated when his art came back positive.
his pcr test result also came back positive for covid-19 on the same day while his serology test result is negative.
imported casestwo of the imported cases are singaporeans who returned from india and the philippines.
the remaining imported case is a short-term visit pass holder who arrived from the philippines for a work project in singapore.
moh said the short-term visit pass holder, a 38-year-old filipino man, arrived on apr 23 and served his stay-home notice at a dedicated facility until may 7. his pre-departure test taken in the philippines on apr 22, his on-arrival test in singapore on apr 23, as well as his swab done on may 6 during stay-home notice, were all negative for covid-19.
he was asymptomatic, and was detected when he was tested for covid-19 on may 29, with his test result coming back positive the next day.
"his ct value was very high, which is indicative of a low viral load, and his serology test result has also come back positive," said moh.
"given that these indicate likely past infection, we have classified the case as imported based on his travel history.
he is likely to be shedding minute fragments of the virus rna, which are no longer transmissible and infective to others.
"22 more patients dischargedmoh said the overall number of new cases in the community has decreased from 176 cases in the week before to 125 cases in the past week.
the number of unlinked cases in the community has also decreased from 30 cases in the week before to 27 cases in the past week.
among the 179 cases reported from may 26 to jun 1, 49 cases have tested positive for their serology tests while 112 have tested negative.
another 18 serology test results are pending.
twenty-two more cases have been discharged from hospitals or community isolation facilities, bringing singapore's total recoveries to 61,481. there are 217 cases still in hospital.
most of them are stable or improving, and two are in critical condition in the intensive care unit.
another 338 are being isolated and cared for at community facilities.
as of tuesday, singapore has reported a total of 62,069 covid-19 cases and 33 fatalities.
​​​​​​​mandatory covid-19 tests began for residents of three housing blocks in yishun and hougang on tuesday.
residents ofblock 745 yishun street 72were being tested after moh said on monday that there was "likely covid-19 transmission" in the block.
residents ofblocks 501 and 507 hougang avenue 8were also set to undergo the mandatory covid-19 tests, after traces of the virus were found in wastewater samples taken from those blocks.
moh said no confirmed cases had yet to be identified in the blocks.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
the world health organisation (who) has approved a covid-19 vaccine made by sinovac biotech for emergency-use listing, the second chinese-produced shot to get its endorsement, a who statement said on tuesday.
who emergency listing is a signal to national regulators on a product's safety and efficacy.
it would also allow the shot to be included in covax, the global programme to provide vaccines mainly for poor countries, which currently faces major supply problems due to india's suspension of vaccine exports.
in a statement, the independent panel of experts said it recommended sinovac's vaccine for people over 18, with a second dose two to four weeks later.
read more herebritain recorded no new covid-19 deaths for the first time since the global pandemic began, bolstering calls from industry groups for prime minister boris johnson to lift restrictions as planned this month.
zero deaths have been reported in the past day, according to the latest statistics published on the government's coronavirus dashboard at 4pm (11pm singapore time) on tuesday.
that's the first time since march 7 last year that nobody has died in the united kingdom from the disease.
read more herethe white house said on tuesday that brazil's jbs sa has informed the us government that a ransomware attack against the company that has disrupted meat production in north america and australia originated from a criminal organisation likely based in russia.
jbs is the world's largest meatpacker and the incident caused its australian operations to shut down on monday and has stopped livestock slaughter at its plants in several us states.
the ransomware attack follows one last month by a group with ties to russia on colonial pipeline, the largest fuel pipeline in the united states, that crippled fuel delivery for several days in the us south-east.
read more hereflorida on tuesday became the latest and largest us state to ban transgender girls and women from participating in female sports at schools, part of a campaign in statehouses nationwide this year assailed as discriminatory by equal rights activists.
republican governor ron desantis, who is closely aligned with former president donald trump, enacted the law on the first day of pride month, which celebrates the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (lgbtq) community.
desantis said the law, which states participation rules for public high schools and universities, was needed to ensure fairness for women participating in sports across the state.
read more herean official canadian panel on tuesday said people who received a first shot of astrazeneca's covid-19 vaccine can choose to receive a different shot for their second dose, dealing another potential blow to the pharmaceutical giant.
theresa tam, canada's chief public health officer, said one reason for the recommendation by the national advisory committee on immunisation was concern about rare and potentially fatal blood clots linked to the astrazeneca vaccine.
"if it weren't for that, then probably one would progress with giving the same (vaccine) as a second dose," she told reporters, adding canada was following the example of others.
read more herejoin st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore — all 26 hua zai eating house outlets will be closed from 1 june for two weeks and re-open on 15 june following the detection of covid-19 cases linked to an outlet at anchorvale, the ministry of health (moh) said on tuesday (1 june).
in its daily covid-19 report, moh said that it is investigating cases of infection amongst individuals who work at hua zai outlets.
"our epidemiological investigations have found that there is likely ongoing transmission among individuals who work at some of the hua zai outlets.
"the hua zai outlet in ntuc foodfare (308 anchorvale road) has been closed since 30 may, after a number of cases linked to the coffee shop were detected.
as of tuesday, the ntuc foodfare (308 anchorvale road) cluster has a total of nine cases, with the two most recent cases added to the cluster on 30 may.
the source of the cluster is a 33-year-old malaysian man who works as a kitchen assistant at hua zai.
he was confirmed to have covid-19 on 29 may.
on tuesday, the moh reported 18 new covid-19 cases in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,069. of them, 15 are local cases in the community with eight linked to previous infections.
the three remaining new cases are imported.
stay in the know on-the-go: join yahoo singapore's telegram channel at http://t.
me/yahoosingaporerelated stories:15 of 18 new covid cases in singapore in communityglobal cannabis liberalisation poses a threat to cnb: faishal ibrahimcovid-19 virus not transmitted to humans via food: sfawe look at both industrial reits to suss out which makes a better buy.
the post better buy: keppel dc reit vs mapletree industrial trust appeared first on the smart investor.
malaysia scrambled jets to intercept 16 chinese military aircraft off the country's coast in the south china sea, a rare incident that the foreign minister angrily denounced tuesday as an "intrusion".
spinningfields,,, 65-6,,!china has jailed a popular blogger for "defaming martyrs" after he suggested the death toll of the china-india border clash last year was higher than the official count of four.
missed out on the recent hdb bto may sales launch?
don't fret.
there's another hdb bto sales launch scheduled for august 2021.  if you've missed may's launch, there's also the august 2021's launch where you can expected an estimated 4,900 units across seven locations up [.
.
. ]
the post hdb bto launches in 2021 (bukit batok, tengah, kallang – whampoa, toa payoh – bidadari, woodlands, bukit merah, geylang, hougang, jurong east, queenstown, tampines) appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
thousands of doctors across india wore black armbands on tuesday calling for the arrest of a hugely popular guru who has claimed yoga can prevent covid-19 and that conventional medicine has killed thousands of coronavirus patients.
《!》ut,!if you've got a citibank credit card, you're in luck.
here are the deals you can enjoy as a citibank credit cardmember (on top of the credit card's own perks).
a well-known global bank, citibank offers some of the best credit cards in singapore.
it [.
.
. ]
the post citibank credit card promotions and deals: june 2021 appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
israeli politicians battling to unseat veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu have until just before midnight wednesday to make their "change" coalition, composed of bitter ideological rivals, viable.
covid-19 variants are to be known by letters of the greek alphabet to avoid stigmatising nations where they were first detected, the world health organization announced monday.
all asset classes.
industry-leading prices.
user-friendly investing online.
the employers of an american journalist detained by myanmar authorities said monday they were yet to receive any information on his whereabouts or wellbeing, a week after he was detained.
china has relaxed its family planning policy to allow couples to have three children after a census showed its population is rapidly ageing, state media reported monday, further unwinding four decades of controls in the world's most populous nation which have strangled the birthrate.
the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
,《》《》,,!one: full blast might've been a quick replacement for one: empower, but the martial arts spectacle delivered plenty of exciting action.
the show, which aired on friday, 28 may, featured a one super series muay thai main event between a pair of top contenders and a flyweight co-main event between rising stars.
in the evening's final .
.
.
continue reading "saemapetch kos kulabdam, xie tkos agasa at one: full blast"these renewable insurance standalones cost very little in defraying very large medical bills.
in case you are looking out for protection against infectious diseases, something that has become increasingly commonplace, you might be glad to know that many personal accident insurance plans have turned hybrid [.
.
. ]
the post best personal accident insurance plans in singapore (2021) appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
a major us-australia joint military exercise will go ahead this year despite pandemic concerns but will be significantly scaled-back, a senior australian military officer said tuesday.
here is what whole mouth dental implants should cost you in your areachina on tuesday denied an australian academic's claims that he had been tortured in custody during his two-year detention on espionage charges.
the vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap) aims to provide singaporeans with an added layer of peace of mind when they choose to be vaccinated.
the post vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap): how much will moh be insuring for serious side effects related to covid-19 vaccination?
appeared first on dollarsandsense.
sg.
the ministry of health (moh) on monday (31 may) confirmed the detection of 23 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,051.
「」kol//,/.
a senior australian cabinet minister on monday dropped a high-profile defamation suit against public broadcaster abc over its publication of rape allegations that helped spark nationwide protests.
the opec group of oil-producing countries and its allies agreed tuesday to maintain planned production increases, as pandemic-hit demand for crude recovers.
lawrence wong: singapore will not revert to phase 3 when phase 2 (heightened alert) ends despite community spread of covid-19 shown sign under control.
keep up to speed at a glance with the top 10 daily storieskuala lumpur, malaysia (ap) — malaysia's air force said tuesday that 16 chinese military jets flew in a tactical formation over the south china sea and nearly infringed on the country's airspace, calling it a threat to malaysia's sovereignty.
the air force said its radar picked up the jets flying in an "in-trail" formation near malaysian airspace in eastern sarawak state on borneo on monday.
it said the jets then headed near malaysian-administered luconia shoals, a rich fishing ground in the disputed south china sea before moving nearly 60 nautical miles (110 kilometers) off the coast of sarawak.
after attempts to engage the jets failed, the air force said it sent planes to identify them.
it found the planes were ilyushin il-76 and xian y-20 strategic transporters flying at altitudes between 23,000 and 27,000 feet.
the air force said it reported the flights to the foreign ministry.
"this incident is a serious threat to national sovereignty and flight safety due to the air traffic density over the airways," it said in a statement.
foreign ministry and chinese embassy officials couldn't be reached immediately for comment.
china claims almost the entire south china sea.
brunei, malaysia, the philippines, taiwan and vietnam also have overlapping claims.
tensions have ramped up since china began a massive land reclamation program in 2013. the strategically important area has some of the world's busiest sea lanes and is also rich in fisheries and may hold underground oil and natural gas reserves.
malaysia says chinese coast guard and navy ships intruded into its waters in the south china sea 89 times between 2016 and 2019.  malaysia has sent six diplomatic protests to china, including one in 2017 in response to a chinese note asserting its claim to the south luconia shoals.
we look at both industrial reits to suss out which makes a better buy.
the post better buy: keppel dc reit vs mapletree industrial trust appeared first on the smart investor.
all 26 hua zai eating house outlets will be closed from 1 june for two weeks and re-open on 15 june following the detection of covid-19 cases linked to an outlet at anchorvale, the ministry of health (moh) said on tuesday (1 june).
!malaysia scrambled jets to intercept 16 chinese military aircraft off the country's coast in the south china sea, a rare incident that the foreign minister angrily denounced tuesday as an "intrusion".
china has jailed a popular blogger for "defaming martyrs" after he suggested the death toll of the china-india border clash last year was higher than the official count of four.
missed out on the recent hdb bto may sales launch?
don't fret.
there's another hdb bto sales launch scheduled for august 2021.  if you've missed may's launch, there's also the august 2021's launch where you can expected an estimated 4,900 units across seven locations up [.
.
. ]
the post hdb bto launches in 2021 (bukit batok, tengah, kallang – whampoa, toa payoh – bidadari, woodlands, bukit merah, geylang, hougang, jurong east, queenstown, tampines) appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
spinningfields,,, 65-6,,!thousands of doctors across india wore black armbands on tuesday calling for the arrest of a hugely popular guru who has claimed yoga can prevent covid-19 and that conventional medicine has killed thousands of coronavirus patients.
if you've got a citibank credit card, you're in luck.
here are the deals you can enjoy as a citibank credit cardmember (on top of the credit card's own perks).
a well-known global bank, citibank offers some of the best credit cards in singapore.
it [.
.
. ]
the post citibank credit card promotions and deals: june 2021 appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
israeli politicians battling to unseat veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu have until just before midnight wednesday to make their "change" coalition, composed of bitter ideological rivals, viable.
《!》ut,!covid-19 variants are to be known by letters of the greek alphabet to avoid stigmatising nations where they were first detected, the world health organization announced monday.
the employers of an american journalist detained by myanmar authorities said monday they were yet to receive any information on his whereabouts or wellbeing, a week after he was detained.
china has relaxed its family planning policy to allow couples to have three children after a census showed its population is rapidly ageing, state media reported monday, further unwinding four decades of controls in the world's most populous nation which have strangled the birthrate.
all asset classes.
industry-leading prices.
user-friendly investing online.
the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
one: full blast might've been a quick replacement for one: empower, but the martial arts spectacle delivered plenty of exciting action.
the show, which aired on friday, 28 may, featured a one super series muay thai main event between a pair of top contenders and a flyweight co-main event between rising stars.
in the evening's final .
.
.
continue reading "saemapetch kos kulabdam, xie tkos agasa at one: full blast"these renewable insurance standalones cost very little in defraying very large medical bills.
in case you are looking out for protection against infectious diseases, something that has become increasingly commonplace, you might be glad to know that many personal accident insurance plans have turned hybrid [.
.
. ]
the post best personal accident insurance plans in singapore (2021) appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
here is what whole mouth dental implants should cost you in your areaa major us-australia joint military exercise will go ahead this year despite pandemic concerns but will be significantly scaled-back, a senior australian military officer said tuesday.
china on tuesday denied an australian academic's claims that he had been tortured in custody during his two-year detention on espionage charges.
the vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap) aims to provide singaporeans with an added layer of peace of mind when they choose to be vaccinated.
the post vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap): how much will moh be insuring for serious side effects related to covid-19 vaccination?
appeared first on dollarsandsense.
sg.
「」kol//,/.
the ministry of health (moh) on monday (31 may) confirmed the detection of 23 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,051. a senior australian cabinet minister on monday dropped a high-profile defamation suit against public broadcaster abc over its publication of rape allegations that helped spark nationwide protests.
the opec group of oil-producing countries and its allies agreed tuesday to maintain planned production increases, as pandemic-hit demand for crude recovers.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
hong kong • the widely monitored national security case of 47 hong kong opposition figures charged with conspiracy to commit subversion, most of whom have been in custody for the past three months, will resume on july 8, a judge ruled yesterday.
defendants will receive evidence against them before june 28 and they can make a plea at their next appearance in the west kowloon court.
the case may then be moved to the high court, which has the power to give longer sentences.
some lawyers argued defendants could not be expected to make a plea so soon, given the national security law was new and it would take longer than usual to analyse the evidence.
judge victor so dismissed the request.
"seven days is the law," he said, referring to the deadline given to the prosecution to present the evidence.
the 47 were arrested on charges of participating in an unofficial, non-binding and independently organised primary vote last year to select candidates for a since-postponed city election, which the authorities say was a "vicious plot" to subvert the government.
around a hundred supporters gathered outside the court, waving smartphone flashlights and chanting "hong kongers, hang in there".
"i want to tell my friends among the 47 that they don't need to worry, as many are determined to fight on," activist jerry yuen said outside the court.
the charges against the activists, many of whom have announced their retirement from politics, are punishable with up to life in prison.
diplomats and rights groups are closely watching the case amid mounting concerns over the independence of the former british colony's judicial system, which is seen as the foundation on which its financial prowess was built.
marathon bail hearings in march lasted four days and dragged late into the night, causing several defendants to fall ill and seek hospital treatment.
most of the subsequent appeals for bail have been denied.
on friday, high court judge esther toh denied former lawmaker claudia mo's bail application, citing among other reasons her whatsapp messages with foreign journalists commenting on news.
in denying bail in mid-march to jeremy tam, another former lawmaker, ms toh cited an e-mail he received from the us consulate where he was invited to "catch up".
his lawyers said he never replied.
ten of the defendants are expected to apply for bail again today and tomorrow.
the security law sets a high threshold for defendants seeking bail to demonstrate they would not break the law, a departure from common law practice, which puts the onus on prosecutors to make their case for detention as an exception.
the protracted hearings and the reasons for rejecting bail have stunned diplomats and rights groups, who see it as a dramatic display of the chinese-ruled city's authoritarian turn.
beijing's office that oversees matters in hong kong has also warned of threats made to a judge who sentenced media tycoon jimmy lai and other democracy activists for their roles in an unauthorised assembly on oct 1, 2019. a representative for the hong kong and macau affairs office (hkmao) said the presiding judge had received threatening phone calls, which the office said would not be tolerated.
"this is a serious threat to the personal safety of judges, a flagrant challenge to the judicial system in hong kong and a gross violation of the rule of law and order in hong kong," xinhua quoted a statement by hkmao as saying late on sunday.
reutersjoin st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
'super blood moon' glows across globe trapped at border israel-palestine conflict escalates india's covid-19 surge is worsening 'super pink moon' shines across the world
by maggie fox, cnnupdated 1941 gmt (0341 hkt) june 1, 2021  (cnn)when the final phase 3 data came out last november showing the mrna vaccines made by pfizer/biontech and moderna were more than 90% effective, dr.  anthony fauci had no words.
he texted smiley face emojis to a journalist seeking his reaction.
sign up here to get the results are in with dr.  sanjay gupta every tuesday from the cnn health team.
discover thomson reutersby reuters staff2 min readbeijing (reuters) china's market regulator fined 15 private tutoring firms a combined 36.
5 million yuan ($5.
73 million) for false advertising and pricing frauds, the official people's daily newspaper reported on tuesday, amid a crackdown on the sector.
the 15 companies include tencent-backed yuanfudao, alibaba-backed zuoyebang, and new oriental education & technology group, the people's daily said, citing a news briefing by the regulator.
the news comes a day after china announced it would allow couples to have a third child, amid rising concern about a declining fertility rate that many in china blame on the high cost of raising families.
most children in china undergo private tuition in addition to public schooling.
some courses offered by the companies were sold at just 1 yuan, discounts that masked the eventual full price, the newspaper reported.
the penalised firms included several with u. s.  or hong kong listings, including tal education group, onesmart education group, beststudy education group and scholar education.
on the same day, guangdong and shanghai provincial-level market regulators fined private education companies over pricing and advertising frauds.
six companies were fined a combined of 14 million yuan in guangdong, according to a statement from the local market regulator.
it said the companies made up teachers' diplomas, teaching qualifications and experience, and made false promises to students.
the shanghai market regulator announced on its wechat account that it had fined four companies, including english teaching companies dada and wall street english, a total of 10 million yuan.
($1 = 6.
3667 chinese yuan)reporting by lusha zhang, sophie yu and tony munroe; editing by christian schmollinger, raju gopalakrishnan and gerry doyleour standards: the thomson reuters trust principles.
all quotes delayed a minimum of 15 minutes.
see here for a complete list of exchanges and delays.

                    tuesday, 01 jun 2021
                of the  2,230 new cases in thailand, 77 were found in prison.
afpbangkok (the nation/ann): thailand saw 2,230 new covid-19 cases and 38 deaths in the past 24 hours.
the number of cases reported on tuesday (june 1)was less than half the 5,485 on the previous day, but the death toll was double monday's fatalities.
of the new cases, 77 were found in prisons, the public health ministry said.
some 3,390 patients have recovered and been discharged from hospitals.
the cumulative cases in the country rose to 162,022, with 1,069 fatalities.
the nation/asia news network
tags / keywords:
thailand
                                                                ,
                                                                                                covid-19
                                                                ,
                                                                                                cases
                                                                ,
                                                                                                drop



report it to us.
thank you for your report!copyright © 1995-
            

 star media group berhad (10894d)best viewed on chrome browsers.
{{item['v1 header']}}
   {{item['v1 body']}}

  {{item['v2 header']}}

are you having urinary troubles?
by taking the survey, it is deemed that you consent to the termswe hope you enjoy this feature!
frequent and widespread testing will allow for more economic and social activities to continue in a safe manner.
currently, the deployment of the antigen rapid test (art) is being piloted for regular surveillance testing for workers in dorms, construction sites, airport and selected marine shipyards.
this will soon be progressively rolled out in other setting such as in student hostels in autonomous universities and at selected malls.
with the increase in household transmission of the covid-19 virus being observed, all household members of persons who have been identified as a close contact of confirmed covid-19 cases are to self-isolate at home with immediate effect.
increase surveillance testing using antigen rapid tests (arts)the polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test has been effective in detecting positive covid-19 cases.
however, results for the pcr test can take more than a day.
newer tests, such as arts, complement existing testing regimes as they are cheaper, faster, and more convenient to administer, thus making them very effective surveillance tests.
this allows the scale of testing to be expanded to the wider population,  allowing for early identification of potential infections so that public health actions can be triggered sooner to stem further spread.
as a start, arts have been piloted for regular surveillance testing for workers in dorms, construction sites, airport and selected marine shipyards.
this is in addition to the pcr-based rostered routine testing.
this pilot will be extended to student hostels in autonomous universities, and selected capitaland malls for tenants and people who work there.
arts can also be deployed at workplaces and made available for over-the-counter sales.
all workplaces and employers are encouraged to adopt regular testing using such alternative testing methods to keep their staff and customers safe.
household contacts of persons under quarantine to self-isolatecurrently, close contacts of a confirmed covid-19 case are issued quarantine orders and are isolated at government quarantine facilities or at home for 14 days from the last day of exposure to an infected individual.
as an added precaution, household contacts of persons under quarantine are to self-isolate at home and minimise their social interactions.
they are to do so until the person under quarantine receives a negative covid-19 test result or the person is no longer under quarantine.
this will help to limit the spread of the virus, after increased transmission between those in the same household are observed.
enhancing testing and contract tracing regimes, coupled with more of the population being vaccinated, will allow for more work and activities to resume in a safe manner, even as the covid-19 situation continues to evolve.
for more information, click here for moh's press release.
kuala lumpur: the malaysian air force said on tuesday (jun 1) that it scrambled its jets to conduct a visual confirmation, after chinese military transport planes were detected heading towards its national airspace and threatened the country's sovereignty.
in a statement, the royal malaysian air force (rmaf) said it identified 16 people's liberation army air force (plaaf) planes making suspicious flights in malaysia's maritime zone air space, the kota kinabalu flight information region (fir) and approaching the malaysian national airspace on may 31. the planes were identified by the rmaf's defence radar in sarawak at 11.
53am, said the statement.
it also said that the planes flew in an in-trail tactical formation 60 nautical miles from one another.
"the planes flew in that formation using the same point of entry and exit.
the planes then changed (direction), heading to the beting patinggi ali air space which is important to the country.
"the plaaf planes then flew via singapore fir before entering the malaysia maritime zone air space and the kota kinabalu fir, the rmaf statement said, adding that the chinese planes approached within 60 nautical miles of  sarawak beach, "threatening malaysia's sovereignty".
the rmaf then put its hawk 208 jets from no.
6 squadron on high alert, said the statement.
"the plaaf planes were put under continued radar surveillance and were instructed to contact controllers in the kota kinabalu fir.
when these instructions were not heeded and the plaaf planes crossed kota kinabalu fir and headed towards the national airspace, the malaysia air force scrambled intercepting jets at 1.
33pm to perform a visual identification.
""as a result of the air interception carried out, the rmaf has identified the aircraft as ilyushin il-76 and xian y-20 aircraft.
these types of aircraft are strategic transport aircraft and capable of performing various missions.
this incident is a serious matter that threatens national sovereignty and aviation safety, based on the density of air traffic in the airline routes in kota kinabalu fir".
"this incident was handled by the malaysian air force based on protocols by the icao and our national air defence strategy.
the foreign ministry has taken note of this through the defence ministry," the statement added.
"routine flight training"the chinese embassy in malaysia said on tuesday the planes were conducting routine flight training.
"as far as i know, the reported activities are routine flight training of the chinese air force and do not target any country," said a spokesperson.
"chinese military aircraft enjoy the freedom of overflight in the relevant airspace.
"during this training, the chinese military aircraft strictly abided by the relevant international law and did not enter the territorial airspace of any other country.
"the spokesperson said that china and malaysia are friendly neighbours, and that china is willing to continue bilateral friendly consultations with malaysia to jointly maintain regional peace and stability.
malaysian foreign minister hishammuddin hussein said the ministry will issue a "note of diplomatic protest" and will ask china's ambassador to malaysia to explain the "breach of the malaysian airspace and sovereignty".
"malaysia's stand is clear having friendly diplomatic relations with any countries does not mean that we will compromise on our national security," mr hishammuddin said in a statement.
china claims much of the south china sea, but there are also overlapping claims by brunei, malaysia, the philippines, taiwan, and vietnam.
washington and its allies have also challenged beijing's territorial claims.
in april last year, mr hishammuddin called for calm in the south china sea and reaffirmed malaysia's commitment to peace in the disputed waters.
this came after reports that a chinese government survey ship was "tagging" an exploration vessel operated by malaysia's state oil company petronas in the south china sea.
cna has reached out to the civil aviation authority of singapore for comments.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore seniors began showing up at vaccination centres from early tuesday morning (june 1), a day after prime minister lee hsien loong said that those aged 60 and above can walk into any centre and get their covid-19 jab on the spot.
among them were some who had initially been reluctant to do so, such as madam lee kwee wah, 74.
"i did not want to take the vaccination previously, so i didn't take it," the retiree told the straits times.
"no particular reason.
"madam lee changed her mind after encouragement from her daughter, following pm lee's appeal to those in her age group.
"my eldest daughter said it is better for me to take it, so i took it," she said.
around three-quarters of those over 60 have had at least one dose or made an appointment to get vaccinated, leaving around 280,000 who have not.
apart from being allowed to get vaccinated without having to make an advance appointment, people in this age group can now also request to receive their jabs at home if they are not mobile or unable to get to a centre.
students have been asked to register for vaccination, while adults under 39 will likely start getting jabbed in mid-june.
on tuesday, president halimah yacob urged seniors to quickly get inoculated against covid-19, especially since the process has been made more convenient for them to do so.
"our seniors have always been the priority of the government in our effort to protect our people against covid-19, as they are more vulnerable, and we would like to see all of them vaccinated," she said in a facebook post on tuesday (june 1).
the president acknowledged that some may have concerns about side effects.
"the vaccine is safe, and the strongest testimony to that is the 760,000 who are already vaccinated," she said, adding that she and her husband both in their 60s have also received their shots.
madam halimah also urged neighbours or friends to help seniors who may not have family to assist them with the vaccination process.
"grassroots organisations or social service agencies can also assist," she said.
"in this way, hopefully we can see all our seniors quickly vaccinated.
"the straits times visited three vaccination centres located at community clubs (ccs) on tuesday, all of which saw seniors walking in to get their shots.
at radin mas cc, around 10 seniors arrived at 7.
30am without appointments, while at marsiling cc, around eight such seniors had trickled in by noon.
tanjong pagar cc saw 21 such walk-ins by 1pm.
one senior, 64-year-old chua ah poh, said she missed her vaccination appointment in april because she had been unwell.
the cleaner said she decided to go to the centre this afternoon to receive her jab after hearing pm lee's pitch on monday and also with encouragement from her family.
she said in mandarin: "all my family members have received the vaccination, so i think it's better for me to get it as soon as possible to be safe and prevent anything from happening. "
madam lee kwee wah (left) did not want to take the vaccination previously but changed her mind after encouragement from her daughter.
st photo: ng sor luan
she encouraged her unvaccinated peers to get jabbed as well, adding: "it is safer to get the vaccination, not just for yourself, but also for the well-being of all singaporeans.
"another senior, retiree liew ho far, 70, said: "i feel safer after taking the vaccination.
but its not just that, we must also take preventive measures, such as going out less often and wearing a mask when going out.
we have to take our life in our own hands.
"mr liew said he had cancelled his previous vaccination appointment because he was hospitalised at the time.
he also encouraged other senior citizens to receive the vaccination, saying in mandarin: "i will encourage them to take the vaccination because it is safe and there is nothing to be afraid of.
"join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
scmp columnistmy take  by alex lopublished: 9:00pm, 31 may, 2021updated: 9:00pm, 31 may, 2021
                alex lo
                alex lo has been a post columnist since 2012, covering major issues affecting hong kong and the rest of china.
a journalist for 25 years, he has worked for various publications in hong kong and toronto as a news reporter and editor.
he has also lectured in journalism at the university of hong kong.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore customers of consumer electronics retailer audio house may have had their personal details, such as names and contact numbers, stolen by a hacking group that had allegedly hacked furniture retailer vhive.
audio house told customers in an e-mail that it was alerted on monday (may 31) that hacking group altdos might have gained unauthorised entry into its servers.
the group claimed to have accessed the retailer's membership database, stolen information from it and used the data to blackmail audio house, the retailer added.
the company is now working with the police and other authorities, as well as a team of web experts, to ascertain if its servers had been breached and to what extent.
the police confirmed a report was lodged and they are investigating the matter.
audio house told the straits times that its database contains information of about 180,000 customers, adding that altdos had threatened the company through e-mails, which it has not responded to.
it said altdos had used fear tactics to pressure the company to pay it, as well as use audio house as a case study to blackmail other firms in future.
in previous hacking incidents, altdos, operating mainly in south-east asia, had stolen customer data from companies, blackmailed the compromised firm, leaked the data online when their demands were not met, and publicised the breaches.
in the audio house breach, the data that could have been stolen included members' names, e-mail addresses, home delivery addresses, contact numbers, credits with the company, and members' past sales transaction records.
audio house said all customer payment details and credit card information are handled by a third party payment gateway, so no credit card information was stored or possibly breached.
"all our members' ecashback and credits are safely stored with us, and you will still be able to use them in your purchases with us," the firm said.
the retailer added it had strengthened its firewall and the system's security after the incident, and had suspended its website temporarily to conduct more tests and the firewall upgrade.
apologising for the potential breach, audio house advised customers who receive any spam e-mails from altdos not to respond to it.
the company also urged customers not to spread unverified information about the incident that could bolster the hacking group's efforts.
those who need help can contact audio house.
altdos had previously claimed responsibility for hacking vhive.
the furniture retailer had said its server was hacked on march 23. compromised information included customers' names, physical and e-mail addresses and mobile numbers, but did not include identification numbers or financial information, said the furniture retailer.
in an e-mail to affected customers in early april, altdos said it managed to hack into vhive three times in nine days and claimed to have stolen information related to more than 300,000 customers and nearly 600,000 transaction records.
the group said it would leak 20,000 customer records daily, until its demands to vhive's management were met.
cyber-security experts had previously said personal details stolen by hackers could be used by cyber criminals to, among other things, send victims personalised phishing e-mails that would allow them to steal passwords or drop ransomware to lock up digital files until the crooks are paid.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
hong kong: hong kong police have arrested an elderly democracy activist as she made a solo demonstration over china's deadly tiananmen crackdown in a vivid illustration of the zero protest tolerance now wielded by authorities in the financial hub.
alexandra wong, 65, was detained on sunday (may 30) on suspicion of taking part in an unlawful assembly as she walked towards beijing's liaison office in hong kong.
wong known locally as "grandma wong" was a regular fixture of the huge democracy protests that swept hong kong in 2019. she could often be seen waving a union jack flag, a symbol of her dissatisfaction with beijing's rule since the city was handed to china by former colonial power britain in 1997. protest is now all but outlawed in hong kong.
authorities have used both the threat of the coronavirus and security concerns to ban demonstrations.
a vigil planned for this friday the 32nd anniversary of beijing's 1989 crackdown on democracy protests in tiananmen square has beendenied permission for the second year in a row.
authorities have cited the coronavirus, although hong kong is currently celebrating no local transmission cases of unknown origin for the last month.
activists had also sought permission for a small tiananmen-themed march on sunday to the liaison office, which represents the central government in the city, but it was also denied permission.
wong turned up anyway that afternoon holding as sign that read "32, june 4, tiananmen's lament" and a yellow umbrella the latter a symbol of hong kong's democracy movement.
the south china morning post said the pensioner started chanting slogans in a park before heading towards the liaison office by herself, while being followed and filmed by police.
she was stopped twice.
"i'm only by myself, just an old lady here.
why stop me?"
the post quoted wong as telling officers.
soon afterwards she was arrested.
police confirmed a 65-year-old woman surnamed wong had been arrested for "knowingly participating in an unauthorised assembly and attempting to incite others to join an unauthorised assembly".
hong kong's democracy movement has been crushed by a broad crackdown on dissent over the last year, including the imposition of a sweeping security law that criminalises much dissent.
in the middle of the 2019 protests wong disappeared for more than a year.
she resurfaced saying she had been detained by mainland authorities during a trip to shenzhen, a neighbouring city where she lived at the time.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
pregnant women are being offered the pfizer and moderna vaccines but anyone who has had a first dose of oxford/astrazeneca should also have a second dose of thisget the latest email updates for surrey with our free daily newsletterthe vaccination programme is well under way and has been a huge success so far, but many people may still have questions about what they can or cannot do.
one of those key questions is whether women can have the covid-19 vaccine if they're pregnant, with advice having changed over time.
in short, the answer is 'yes', but there is some important information to be aware of.
surreylive has looked at the government guidance and has provided the key information below.
the vaccines do not contain live coronavirus and cannot infect a pregnant woman or her unborn baby in the womb.
the guidance reads: "covid-19 vaccines offer pregnant women the best protection against covid-19 disease which can be serious in later pregnancy for some women.
"the first dose of covid-19 vaccine will give you good protection.
you need the second dose to get longer lasting protection.
you do not need to delay this second dose.
"pregnant women should have the same vaccine for their first and second doses, unless they have a serious side effect after the first dose.
the government guidance says: "it's recommended you have the same vaccine for both doses.
"if you had the oxford/astrazeneca vaccine for your first dose and did not have any serious side effects you should have it for your second dose. "
if your first dose was the astrazeneca (az) vaccine, you should consider the information in the covid-19 vaccination and blood clotting leaflet.
signing up to the surreylive newsletter means you'll receive our daily news email.
it couldn't be simpler and it takes seconds simply press here, enter your email address and follow the instructions.
you can also enter your address at the top of this page in the box below the picture on most desktop and mobile platforms.
changed your mind?
there's an 'unsubscribe' button at the bottom of every newsletter we send out.
however, the pfizer and moderna vaccines are now the preferred vaccines for pregnant women.
this is because they have been more widely used during pregnancy in other countries and have not caused any safety issues.
the guidance says: "in the usa, around 90,000 pregnant women have been vaccinated mainly with pfizer and moderna vaccines and no safety concerns have been identified.
"the joint committee on vaccination and immunisation (jcvi) has advised that pregnant women should be offered the vaccines at the same time as people of the same age or risk group.
the guidance says: "you can book your covid-19 vaccination online.
"if you're under 40, you'll only be shown appointments for the pfizer/biontech or moderna vaccine.
if you're 40 or over, you'll be asked if you're pregnant to make sure you're only shown appointments for these vaccines.
"at your appointment, you'll be able to discuss the benefits and potential risks of having the vaccine in pregnancy.
this is so you can make an informed decision about having it.
you can also speak to a gp or your maternity team for advice.
"most of the side effects from the vaccines are mild and short-term, and not everyone gets them.
very common side effects in the first day or two include: flu-like symptoms are also possible, with episodes of shivering and shaking for a day or two.
you can rest and take the normal dose of paracetamol (follow the advice in the packaging) to help you feel better.
although feeling feverish is not uncommon for two to three days, a high temperature is unusual and may indicate you have covid-19 or another infection.
in this instance you should take a coronavirus test.
symptoms following a vaccination normally last less than a week, but if your symptoms seem to get worse or if you are concerned, call nhs 111.  for more information on what to expect after a vaccine, see here.
leading figures in tennis and sport have rallied to support naomi osaka after the women's world no.
2 withdrew from the french open in a row about post-match media duties, saying she had been suffering from "depression" and "anxiety".
one of the biggest names in sport, the 23-year-old stunned the tennis world when she pulled out of the grand slam after being fined and threatened with expulsion for refusing to show up at an obligatory news conference on sunday.
the four-time grand slam champion had signalled her intention to skip her media duties to protect her mental well-being on social media and returned to twitter yesterday morning (singapore time) to announce her withdrawal.
"i think now the best thing for the tournament, the other players and my well-being is that i withdraw so that everyone can go back to focusing on the tennis going on in paris," she wrote.
while her original stance had earned little backing from her fellow professionals, most of whom said that dealing with the media was part of the job, her withdrawal triggered a wave of support from the sporting world.
"so proud of you," multiple grand slam winner venus williams posted on twitter.
williams' sister serena and younger american players coco gauff and sloane stephens also chimed in with messages of support, as the focus shifted from osaka's responsibilities to her well-being.
serena, 39, was inevitably asked for her reaction to osaka's decision, after her 7-6(8/6), 6-2 first-round win over romanian irina-camelia begu.
"the only thing i feel is that i feel for naomi," said the 23-time grand slam winner.
"i wish i could give her a hug because i know what it's like.
"like i said, i've been in those positions.
"we have different personalities.
.
.
i'm thick (skinned).
other people are thin.
everyone is different and everyone handles things differently.
"billie jean king echoed comments from fellow women's tennis trailblazer martina navratilova about the importance of mental health.
"it's incredibly brave that naomi osaka has revealed her truth about her struggle with depression," king wrote on social media.
there were also messages of support from athletes in other sports, with golf's michelle wie, the nba's stephen curry and multiple olympic sprint champion usain bolt offering their backing on social media.
however, six-time grand slam champion boris becker told eurosport: "i heard her first response a couple of days ago about this media boycott and that is something to be always taken seriously, especially from such a young woman.
"she couldn't cope with the pressures of facing the media after she loses a match, but that happens frequently and you have to deal with it.
"if she can't cope with the media in paris, she can't cope with the media in wimbledon or the us open.
so i almost feel like her career is in danger due to mental health issues.
"roland garros organisers, meanwhile, were criticised for their handling of the matter.
french tennis federation (fft) president gilles moretton read a prepared statement, offering osaka their support.
however, the irony of him not taking questions, given the context of the row, was not lost on some.
"so the fft handled the ms osaka mental health concerns without empathy or sensitivity.
then the fft president refuses to take questions at a presser.
an own goal," wrote former australian tennis official richard ings.
afp, reutersget the new paper on your phone with the free tnp app.
download from the apple app store or google play store now
the united states could take a lesson from what's happening this week in israel, where two radically diverging wings of israeli politics have united in opposing the polarizing government of prime minister benjamin netanyahu.
naftali bennett and yair lapid couldn't disagree more about big issues.
bennett is an orthodox jewish former settler leader who wants to annex the west bank; lapid is a secular jew who favors a two-state solution to the palestinian problem.
yet the two joined forces last weekend for what supporters call a "change government. "
the mission is to oust netanyahu and end the impasse in israeli politics he helped create.
netanyahu is the ultimate political survivor.
he has remained prime minister for the past 12 years in part because of his genius at exploiting the divisions in israeli society for his own benefit.
he exploited "wedge politics" much like his political ally, former president donald trump.
he has kept his post despite a 2019 indictment on charges of bribery, fraud and breach of trust, and a trial that resumed in april, in which he has pleaded not guilty.
but this week, netanyahu's threats and bluster finally seemed to have lost their bite.
lapid and bennett asked israeli president reuven rivlin for a mandate to form a government, and they appear to have the knesset votes to remove netanyahu.
we'll know by wednesday night whether they have succeeded.
what has happened in israel to produce this extraordinary (if precarious) movement for national unity?
partly it's frustration with the political impasse netanyahu produced as he held office through four inconclusive elections over the past two years.
partly, it's a feeling of disgust about netanyahu continuing to hold power even as he stands trial on charges that he abused it.
most of all, i suspect, bennett and lapid have come together because of a shared passion for the well-being of their country.
and that's the point that i wish americans could learn from watching this episode.
this seems to be a moment where israel's version of "red" and "blue" states — people who disagree about fundamental issues — have decided to put those divisions aside because of something that's more important: national survival.
bennett, the religious conservative, put it this way: "two thousand years ago, there was a jewish state which fell here because of internal quarrels.
this will not happen again.
not on my watch. "
lapid, the secular centrist, also stressed the search for unity, "to see if we can find in the coming days wise compromises for the sake of the big aim.
"one unsettling similarity between israeli and u. s.  politics is that netanyahu's die-hard supporters have been threatening violence in recent days, just as trump's supporters did in the jan.  6 insurrection.
gideon saar, a former netanyahu ally who supports the change coalition, warned: "there is an incitement machine that is running .
.
.
an incitement machine that has nothing to do with ideology, but only with anxiety about the loss of power.
"avigdor liberman, another former netanyahu ally now backing change, specifically likened the threats and intimidation by netanyahu's supporters against those they view as traitors to the jan 6.  insurrection.
"when i look at the legal attempt to torpedo the [coalition] government .
.
.
i see what happened on the capitol hill happening here.
i hope it's just a nightmare scenario," liberman said.
i've watched lapid and bennett speak many times in tel aviv at conferences held by the institute for national security studies.
it's hard to imagine two more different people — in style, temperament and ideology.
they have competing visions of the future of the state.
but what they share is a belief that the nation and its institutions come first.
"the country is paralyzed because [netanyahu] only cares for himself," argues amos yadlin, a retired israeli air force general who headed military intelligence and recently retired as head of the institute for national security studies.
he argued that the tipping point wasn't a disagreement about national security, where israelis are united except for the palestinian issue — it was exasperation with netanyahu, known in israel as "bibi.
""bibi took our political norms to an unacceptable level .
.
.
by inciting and dividing the people," yadlin told me in a phone interview tuesday.
the diverse coalition for change emerged, he said, because "bibi put himself before the country," and it was time "to normalize again our political system.
"the change coalition won't solve all israel's problems.
but it will reinforce the fundamentals of israeli democracy — and the need for people to unite, even when they disagree bitterly over policy.
let's hope americans experience the same revelation before it's too late.
read more:max boot: republicans are far more radical than democrats on israelraphael mimoun: zionism cannot produce a just peace.
only external pressure can end the israeli apartheid.
james kirchick: trying to make israel vs.  hamas about race is nonsensical and dangerouscharles lane: who's guilty of what in the hamas-israel conflict?the most important news stories of the day, curated by post editors and delivered every morning.
by signing up you agree to our terms of use and privacy policy
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore a van driver who changed lanes abruptly on the bukit timah expressway (bke) on sept 7, 2018, struck a motorcyclist and seriously injured him.
instead of stopping to help the victim, zainlai mashot drove off and refused to admit to the crime even after the rented van he was driving was tracked down by the police.
he admitted to his offences only when the authorities confronted him with video footage of the accident.
on tuesday (june 1), the 45-year-old singaporean pleaded guilty to offences that included causing grievous hurt by a negligent act, failing to stop after an accident, and removing the vehicle involved without police authority.
he was jailed for two weeks and a day, banned from driving for two years, and fined $2,000.
the court heard that zainlai was driving on the bke in the direction of the pan-island expressway at around 7.
40am on the day of the incident when he suddenly switched from the middle to the rightmost lane.
a video clip of the accident played in court shows the van colliding with the motorcycle and the victim being flung to the ground.
the footage shows zainlai driving away from the scene.
the victim, then 24, sustained an elbow fracture and multiple abrasions on his arms and legs.
he was hospitalised for four days and given 50 days' hospitalisation leave.
deputy public prosecutor r.  arvindren said that the motorcycle was damaged with scratches and zainlai did not make any compensation to the victim.
he added that zainlai was unremorseful as he denied being the driver of the van when the vehicle was tracked down.
in mitigation, zainlai asked for a lighter sentence as he had to care for his mother and three daughters who are still in school.
for causing grievous hurt to the motorcyclist by a negligent act, zainlai could have been jailed for up to two years or fined $5,000.
for failing to help the injured motorcyclist, he could have been jailed for up to a year or fined $3,000.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore a variety of covid-19 tests with the latest being over-the-counter test kits are now under singapore's belt, allowing fast, extensive, easy and accurate tests to be conducted as the nation raises its game to fight the virus.
here's a look at the different tests.
swab test from the nose or back of throat, or from sputum.
looks for genetic sequences of covid-19.
cost: over $150 to $200 for pre-departure testing.
if you have been advised by your doctor to take a swab test, this will be free.
time taken: a few hours.
ease of use: requires the use of specialised lab machines.
accuracy: gold standard for testing.
sensitivity rate (ability to detect those who are positive): more than 93 per cent.
other details: very uncomfortable.
an average of over 55,000 pcr and art tests were carried out each day in the second half of may.
some involve using a nasal swab from the lower part of the nose.
looks for proteins on the surface of the virus called antigens.
cost: as low as $10.
time taken: 20 to 30 minutes.
ease of use: deployment is very flexible because it is a handheld device and can be done en masse with many people being swabbed at the same time.
arts have been rolled out to almost all the public health preparedness clinics that are providing the "swab and send home" service and all polyclinics.
to expand testing capacity, the government is hoping to deploy them to private gps as well.
accuracy: not as accurate as pcr tests, but able to pick up infections early.
sensitivity rate: 82 per cent.
other details: those with acute respiratory symptoms are required to take an art test on top of a pcr test to allow for faster detection of cases.
used heavily for pre-event testing.
breathonix's breathalyser tests take under one minute.
photo: st file
no swabbing; just blowing into a mouthpiece or cartridge.
cost: estimated to be around $25.
time taken: under two minutes.
ease of use: involves some equipment.
accuracy: more than 90 per cent of the accuracy of a pcr test.
other details: the breathonix breathalyser is now used at the causeway.
a covid-19 self-test kit sold at a pharmacy in nantes, france.
photo: reuters
like pregnancy kits, these could be art tests which are purchased from pharmacies and  administered at home.
cost: price to be confirmed.
time taken: art usually takes 20 to 30 minutes.
ease of use: ease of use to be confirmed.
accuracy: art tests typically have a sensitivity rate of 82 per cent.
other details: people who are worried about covid-19 and wish to put their mind at ease, such as front-line workers who may wish to test themselves daily.
will be simple to use and not so uncomfortable.
wastewater testing detects the presence of the virus at a location.
photo: st file
detects the presence of the virus at a location.
this can then be followed up with clinical tests.
frequency of sample collection varies from site to site and depends on the purpose of surveillance.
other details: locations islandwide that have had their wastewater surveyed include the four water reclamation plants, workers' dormitories, nursing homes and hostels.
one pcr test on a group of suspected cases.
if the pooled test yields a positive result, all the people in the group will be tested individually to fish out the covid-19 case.
other details: usually conducted in dormitories to get a sense of the prevalence rate of covid-19 there.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
phnom penh: the most senior us official to visit cambodia in years expressed concern on tuesday (jun 1) about china's military presence there and sought clarification on the demolition of us-funded buildings, the state department said.
deputy secretary of state wendy sherman urged cambodia's leadership to "maintain an independent and balanced foreign policy, in the best interests of the cambodian people".
she met prime minister hun sen, who has ruled for over 35 years and has become increasingly close to china while washington has condemned human rights abuses and his demolition of the political opposition.
the pentagon said last year it was worried about reports that the cambodian navy tactical headquarters at ream naval base had been demolished and had asked cambodia for an explanation.
the building, roughly 30 metres long, had housed several small patrol boats.
in october, cambodia said it had razed the building to allow for further expansion and would relocate the demolished facility, denying reports of chinese involvement.
a us state department spokesman said there was "substantial" publicly available evidence that china was working on a major renovation project at ream and said "credible reports" suggested this would include an area under its exclusive control.
"deputy secretary sherman expressed serious concerns about the prc's (china's) military presence and construction of facilities at ream naval base," the state department said in a statement.
"she sought clarification on the demolition of two us-funded buildings at ream without notification or explanation and observed that a prc military base in cambodia would undermine its sovereignty, threaten regional security, and negatively impact us-cambodia relations.
"china has become an increasingly important economic and political ally for cambodia.
ties between china and the united states have deteriorated sharply in recent years over issues including human rights, trade and beijing's military expansion in the south china sea.
cambodia is strategically situated with a gulf of thailand coastline and also belongs to the 10-member association of southeast asian nations.
washington sees close cooperation with asean as crucial to its efforts to counter beijing's growing regional influence.
cambodian government spokesman phay siphan urged dialogue.
"there are some issues that the united states doesn't understand clearly about cambodia and that cambodia does not understand the intentions of the united states," he said.
sherman, who also met opposition leader kem sokha, civil society groups and journalists.
her trip is the first by such a senior us official since well before kem sokha's opposition party was banned in 2017.  a wider crackdown has targeted activists campaigning about issues such as illegal logging.
sherman emphasised the importance of human rights and urged cambodia to abide by international commitments, the state department said.
"we hope this trip is a reminder to the cambodian regime that the us continues to be vigilant about rights and the destruction of democracy in cambodia as well as cambodia's role in being a responsible actor in the region," said opposition official monovithya kem, kem sokha's daughter.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore a doctor has been suspended for five months for trying to sell an erectile dysfunction drug to a man who was not his patient.
although the man did not end up buying the drug, which is regulated, the singapore medical council (smc) felt that dr ho tze woon's two attempts at providing it were conduct that "fell short of that expected of medical practitioners".
the disciplinary tribunal also took into account a third charge, which was not proceeded on.
this relates to his downloading of "pornographic or obscene materials onto the computers of six consultation rooms at the choa chu kang polyclinic where he worked" between october 2014 and july 2016. the doctor pleaded guilty to the charges but said in mitigation that he had not sold the drug, which was also not addictive, unlike medication containing codeine.
the smc received a complaint from the police on the attempted sale of the drug.
it is not stated how the police had found out.
the tribunal said in its published grounds of decision that this was likely the first time such a case has come up in a disciplinary hearing.
"a doctor attempting to sell a regulated medicine/drug, ostensibly obtained in a proper manner originally for his own medical condition, to someone who is not a patient," it said.
[[nid:439767]]the first transaction failed because the man had refused to accept the drug, cialis, as the packaging was damaged.
the deal fell through a second time after they could not agree on the price.
while the tribunal agreed that no actual harm was caused, as the sale did not materialise, the incident does affect public confidence in the profession.
"doctors are able to dispense medicines and drugs in the poisons act without a licence from the proper authority because that is a privilege granted to doctors who are treating patients under their care," it said.
"this trust in the medical profession would be impacted because of the callous way dr ho disregarded the medical ethics guidelines and rules.
"although dr ho said he was only trying to help the man get the drug more cheaply, the tribunal said "it does not appear that dr ho was entirely altruistic about his intentions", based on the text messages between the two men.
dr ho had quoted $203 for a box of 28 pills, including goods and services tax (gst), followed by an exchange of text messages on oct 23, 2017, with the man (mr c).
mr c: btw, why r u charging gst?dr ho: not me, its suppliermr c: supplier?
i'm not even getting a receipt!mr c: like this it's not much diff from buying from clinic!dr ho: ok 190 is ok.  u coming or not?mr c: otw.
$180?the tribunal concluded that dr ho's intent to supply cialis to the man for a price could not be clearer and more palpable.
that the sale did not take place is irrelevant, it said.
the tribunal's verdict, published on tuesday (june 1) on the smc website, was to impose a five-month suspension and a $2,000 fine.
dr ho was also censured and has to pay the cost of the proceedings.
this article was first published in the straits times.
permission required for reproduction.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
geneva (afp) covid-19 variants are to be known by letters of the greek alphabet to avoid stigmatising nations where they were first detected, the world health organisation (who) announced on monday (may 31).
the new system applies to variants of concern the most troubling of which are four in circulation and the second-level variants of interest being tracked.
"they will not replace existing scientific names, but are aimed to help in public discussion," said dr maria van kerkhove, the who's covid-19 technical lead.
under the new system, the variants of concern take on the following names: the hitherto so-called british variant b117 becomes alpha; the b1351 first detected in south africa becomes beta, while the brazilian p. 1 becomes gamma.
the so-called indian variant b1617 is split into sub-lineages, of which the b16172 variant of concern becomes delta.
the b16171 variant of interest is called kappa.
besides these names, there are two other scientific names in use for each mutation, while different geographic names have been used to describe the same variant.
for example, within britain, what other countries have been referring to as the british variant is often called the kent variant the county in south-east england where it was first detected.
the lineage names such as b1172 will still continue to be used in scientific circles, for the mutation information that their name conveys.
"while they have their advantages, these scientific names can be difficult to say and recall, and are prone to misreporting," the who said in a statement.
"as a result, people often resort to calling variants by the places where they are detected, which is stigmatising and discriminatory.
"to avoid this and to simplify public communications, who encourages national authorities, media outlets and others to adopt these new labels. "
in may, united states president joe biden signed a hate crimes law aimed at protecting asian americans who have suffered a surge in attacks during the covid-19 pandemic.
us anti-extremism groups say the number of attacks and hate crimes against asian americans has exploded since the beginning of the crisis.
they lay some of the blame with former president donald trump, who repeatedly referred to covid-19 as the "china virus".
the who has been trying to come up with simplified new nomenclature for the variants for several months.
the greek alphabet contains 24 letters, but there is no plan yet as to where to go next if they are exhausted.
epsilon, zeta, eta, theta and iota have already been ascribed to variants of interest.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore motorists who break traffic rules in school zones and silver zones will face higher fines and additional demerit points from july 1. the fines for traffic offences in these areas, where there is a higher frequency of schoolchildren or the elderly, will be increased by $100, and drivers will also incur two additional demerit points for each offence, said the ministry of home affairs (mha) in a statement on tuesday (june 1).
those who go above the usual speed limit of 40kmh in silver zones, or in school zones when the"40kmh when lights flash" sign is flashing, will also be liable for the higher penalties.
mha said this move follows an increase in traffic accidents resulting in elderly pedestrian casualties from 223 in 2015 to 317 in 2019.  last year, the elderly made up more than 80 per cent of pedestrian fatalities.
"while jaywalking by elderly pedestrians contributed to some of these accidents, many accidents also arise from irresponsible driving behaviour on the motorist's part, such as failing to slow down when approaching a pedestrian crossing.
"the situation may be improved with greater care on the part of motorists," said mha.
for example, for failing to slow down or give way when approaching pedestrian crossings, offenders will incur eight demerit points, up from six, outside silver zones and school zones.
driving or riding against the flow of traffic in these zones will likewise incur eight demerit points instead of six.
composition fines for light vehicles will be $300, up from $200, and $350 for heavy vehicles, up from $250.
a motorist who runs a red light, which is a 12-demerit point offence when committed outside a silver zone and school zone, will incur 14 demerit points when committed in the zones.
the motorist can be fined $500 instead of $400 for all vehicles.
this is the maximum composition fine for all 12-demerit-point offences, which is capped at half of the maximum court fine of $1,000.
a composition fine allows an offence to be settled with a fine, without having to be convicted in court.
mha said it will monitor accident rates for heavy vehicles in silver zones and school zones, and review the cap on composition fines if necessary.
the stiffened measures for motorists in these zones come after other ongoing efforts by the traffic police to enhance road safety for elderly pedestrians.
these include public education for the elderly and enforcement measures for pedestrians at jaywalking hot spots.
the land transport authority has also included additional crossing points and lanes with reduced width to slow down traffic at silver zones.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.

                    monday, 31 may 2021
                visitors wear masks while walking around merlion park, a popular tourist destination, with the marina bay sands in the background in singapore monday, may 31, 2021.  singapore's prime minister lee hsien loong said monday that controls to lower coronavirus infections were working, while announcing a move to vaccinate students after a spate of transmissions in schools and learning centers.
ap
tags / keywords:
singapore
                                                                ,
                                                                                                covid-19
                                                                ,
                                                                                                children
                                                                ,
                                                                                                to be vaccinated
                                                                ,
                                                                                                soon
                                                                ,
                                                                                                future
                                                                ,
                                                                                                virus measures



report it to us.
thank you for your report!copyright © 1995-
            

 star media group berhad (10894d)best viewed on chrome browsers.
{{item['v1 header']}}
   {{item['v1 body']}}

  {{item['v2 header']}}

are you having urinary troubles?
by taking the survey, it is deemed that you consent to the termswe hope you enjoy this feature!
global times reporter on society, cybersecurity, diplomatic relations and topics related to xinjiang.
photo:xinhuaeast china's jiangsu province has reported the world's first case of a human infected with h10n3 avian influenza.
china's health authorities said on tuesday that it was an occasional poultry-to-human transmission, and the risk of a large-scale spread is extremely low.
the patient is a 41-year-old man from zhenjiang, a city in jiangsu province.
the man had a fever and other symptoms on april 23 and was admitted to a local medical institute for treatment on april 28, according to a notice released by china's national health commission on tuesday.
the entire genetic analysis of the virus obtained from the patient showed that he tested positive for the h10n3 virus, making him the first human case of h10n3.
the entire genetic analysis of the virus showed that the h10n3 virus was of avian origin and did not have the ability to effectively infect humans, experts summoned by nhc believed.
"no human cases of h10n3 have been reported in the world, and the h10n3 virus among poultry is low pathogenic.
this case is an occasional poultry-to-human cross-species transmission, and the risk of a large-scale spread is extremely low," nhc said.
h10n3 is a subtype of the influenza a virus, also known as the bird flu virus.
h10n3 is normally lethal to wild birds and poultry, as it can spread through respiratory droplets among the animals, just like the flu and covid-19, said yang zhanqiu, a deputy director of the pathogen biology department at wuhan university.
it is unknown how this person became infected, but he likely got infected from respiratory droplets of poultry or direct contact with sick live poultry, yang said.
it presents a low risk to humans and there is no evidence to indicate that h10n3 virus can cause human-to-human transmission, yang said, adding that we should not overreact to the case, and more monitoring should be carried out to see how it spreads.
cases of humans infected with other types of avian influenza are common.
russia confirmed the first case of human infection with the avian influenza a(h5n8) virus in the world in february, xinhua news agency reported.
central china's hunan province confirmed a human infection case of the h5n6 bird flu virus in december 2020. among the various types of avian influenza, yang said the h5n1 type is highly pathogenic, with a fatality rate of between 40 and 50 percent.
the nhc has instructed jiangsu to carry out relevant epidemic prevention and control measures.
all close contacts of the patient have been put under medical observation.
local authorities have conducted emergency monitoring, with no abnormalities found so far.
the patient's condition is currently stable and is ready to be discharged from hospital, nhc announcement said.
nhc warned the public to avoid contact with sick or dead poultry and to try to avoid direct contact with live poultry.
the h5n8 strain of bird flu has been detected in seven workers at a poultry farm in russia, .
.
.
seniors in singapore who are above 60 years old will be able to walk into any vaccination centre and get their covid-19 jabs on the spot, said prime minister lee hsien loong yesterday.
there will be no need for this group to register or book an appointment.
"we will make the process even more convenient for you.
.
.
just turn up at a vaccination centre and you will be jabbed," he added as he announced efforts to speed up singapore's vaccination exercise.
pm lee's update on singapore's strategy in the next phase of managing the pandemic came in a televised address to the nation.
singapore's director of medical services, associate professor kenneth mak, said at a press conference later that about 73 per cent of singaporeans over 60 have booked their appointments or received their vaccinations.
but pm lee said that despite this "excellent" response, 280,000 seniors have yet to book a slot and urged them to come forward to be vaccinated as soon as possible.
the ministry of health (moh) said in a press release that while all 40 vaccination centres, such as those in community centres, will accept walk-ins for this age group, polyclinics will not be able to do so because of their limited capacity.
seniors who have trouble getting around can request to have their jabs at home.
as at last wednesday, 24 individuals have had their vaccinations at home.
reiterating this option for home vaccination, pm lee said people may contact the silver generation office under the agency for integrated care, and a doctor and nurse will go to their homes to administer the shot.
"for those with elderly parents or relatives, please encourage and persuade your old folks to get vaccinated," said the prime minister, who is 69. moh, in its release, described vaccination as a key enabler for reopening.
"its ability to help us reopen safely can be felt only when we achieve a high level of population coverage for vaccination," said the ministry.
"hence, we urge everyone to be vaccinated when it is offered to you. "
this article first appeared in the straits times.
get the new paper on your phone with the free tnp app.
download from the apple app store or google play store now
prime minister justin trudeau on monday expressed canada's grief while pledging "concrete action" in support of indigenous communities after remains of 215 indigenous children were discovered at an old boarding school.
"as a dad, i can't imagine what it would feel like to have my kids taken away from me," trudeau told a news conference.
"and as prime minister, i am appalled by the shameful policy that stole indigenous children from their communities.
""think of their communities that never saw them again.
think of their hopes, their dreams, their potential, of all they would have accomplished, all they would have become," he said.
"all of that was taken away.
"trudeau, who has made reconciliation with canada's nearly 1.
7 million indigenous people a priority of his government since coming to power in 2015, said he would speak with his ministers to shore up "next and further things we need to do to support (residential school) survivors and the community.
"excavating school burial sites across canada, as many have urged, he also said, "is an important part of discovering the truth.
""canada will be there to support indigenous communities as we discover the extent of this trauma and trying to give opportunities for families and communities to heal.
"the tk'emlups te secwepemc tribe said last week it had used ground-penetrating radar to confirm the remains of the students who attended a school near kamloops, british columbia.
the kamloops indian residential school was the largest of 139 boarding schools set up in the late 19th century to assimilate canada's indigenous peoples, with up to 500 students registered and attending at any one time.
it was operated by the catholic church on behalf of the canadian government from 1890 to 1969, before ottawa took over its administration and closed it a decade later.
official records showed only 50 deaths at the school, where a principal once pleaded for more funds to properly feed students.
children shoes tiny tributes -as the nation mourned, flags atop government buildings were lowered to half-mast over the weekend.
row upon row of children's shoes were left in front of parliament in ottawa and on steps outside government offices and churches in several cities, forming makeshift memorials.
about 100 people, several in ceremonial attire, also marched sunday in the mohawk community of kahnawake, near montreal.
national chief of the assembly of first nations perry bellegarde was quoted by the globe and mail as saying former students and families "deserve to know the truth.
""a thorough investigation into all former residential school sites could lead to more truths of the genocide against our people," he added.
the british columbia coroner is helping the tk'emlups te secwepemc tribe establish the causes and timings of the student deaths in kamloops.
on monday, opposition parties asked for -- and trudeau agreed to -- an emergency debate in parliament on the "heart-breaking" discovery.
some 150,000 indian, inuit and metis youngsters in total were forcibly enrolled in these schools, where students were physically and sexually abused by headmasters and teachers who stripped them of their culture and language.
today those experiences are blamed for a high incidence of poverty, alcoholism and domestic violence, as well as high suicide rates, in indigenous communities.
a truth and reconciliation commission has identified the names of, or information about, at least 4,100 children who died from abuse or neglect while attending a residential school.
it estimates the actual toll is much higher.
the commission concluded in a 2015 report that more than a century of abuses at the schools amounted to "cultural genocide.
"seven years earlier, ottawa had formally apologized as part of a can$1.
9 billion (us$1.
5 billion) settlement with former students.
the national centre for truth and reconciliation at the university of manitoba, meanwhile, set up an online registry with the names of the thousands of children who never came home from the boarding schools, along with old class photos.
amc/dwmalaysia scrambled jets to intercept 16 chinese military aircraft off the country's coast in the south china sea, a rare incident that the foreign minister angrily denounced tuesday as an "intrusion".
thousands of doctors across india wore black armbands on tuesday calling for the arrest of a hugely popular guru who has claimed yoga can prevent covid-19 and that conventional medicine has killed thousands of coronavirus patients.
!missed out on the recent hdb bto may sales launch?
don't fret.
there's another hdb bto sales launch scheduled for august 2021.  if you've missed may's launch, there's also the august 2021's launch where you can expected an estimated 4,900 units across seven locations up [.
.
. ]
the post hdb bto launches in 2021 (bukit batok, tengah, kallang – whampoa, toa payoh – bidadari, woodlands, bukit merah, geylang, hougang, jurong east, queenstown, tampines) appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
if you've got a citibank credit card, you're in luck.
here are the deals you can enjoy as a citibank credit cardmember (on top of the credit card's own perks).
a well-known global bank, citibank offers some of the best credit cards in singapore.
it [.
.
. ]
the post citibank credit card promotions and deals: june 2021 appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
covid-19 variants are to be known by letters of the greek alphabet to avoid stigmatising nations where they were first detected, the world health organization announced monday.
,,.
,,.
israeli politicians battling to unseat veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu have until just before midnight wednesday to make their "change" coalition, composed of bitter ideological rivals, viable.
the employers of an american journalist detained by myanmar authorities said monday they were yet to receive any information on his whereabouts or wellbeing, a week after he was detained.
china has relaxed its family planning policy to allow couples to have three children after a census showed its population is rapidly ageing, state media reported monday, further unwinding four decades of controls in the world's most populous nation which have strangled the birthrate.
《!》ut,!the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
one: full blast might've been a quick replacement for one: empower, but the martial arts spectacle delivered plenty of exciting action.
the show, which aired on friday, 28 may, featured a one super series muay thai main event between a pair of top contenders and a flyweight co-main event between rising stars.
in the evening's final .
.
.
continue reading "saemapetch kos kulabdam, xie tkos agasa at one: full blast"we look at both industrial reits to suss out which makes a better buy.
the post better buy: keppel dc reit vs mapletree industrial trust appeared first on the smart investor.
all asset classes.
industry-leading prices.
user-friendly investing online.
these renewable insurance standalones cost very little in defraying very large medical bills.
in case you are looking out for protection against infectious diseases, something that has become increasingly commonplace, you might be glad to know that many personal accident insurance plans have turned hybrid [.
.
. ]
the post best personal accident insurance plans in singapore (2021) appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
china has jailed a popular blogger for "defaming martyrs" after he suggested the death toll of the china-india border clash last year was higher than the official count of four.
all 26 hua zai eating house outlets will be closed from 1 june for two weeks and re-open on 15 june following the detection of covid-19 cases linked to an outlet at anchorvale, the ministry of health (moh) said on tuesday (1 june).
,《》《》,,!a major us-australia joint military exercise will go ahead this year despite pandemic concerns but will be significantly scaled-back, a senior australian military officer said tuesday.
the vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap) aims to provide singaporeans with an added layer of peace of mind when they choose to be vaccinated.
the post vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap): how much will moh be insuring for serious side effects related to covid-19 vaccination?
appeared first on dollarsandsense.
sg.
a senior australian cabinet minister on monday dropped a high-profile defamation suit against public broadcaster abc over its publication of rape allegations that helped spark nationwide protests.
here is what whole mouth dental implants should cost you in your areachina on tuesday denied an australian academic's claims that he had been tortured in custody during his two-year detention on espionage charges.
dozens of leading hong kong democracy activists could face up to life in prison for organising an unofficial primary election, prosecutors confirmed monday, in the most sweeping use yet of beijing's strict new security law.
the ministry of health (moh) on monday (31 may) confirmed the detection of 23 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,051.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
kuala lumpur less than a year ago, malaysia was hailed as a success story in the battle against the coronavirus pandemic, with fewer than 13,000 cases by early october.
since then, it has chalked up over half a million covid-19 cases, hitting a daily record high of 9,020 cases last saturday (may 29).
while many blame the government for poor pandemic management, officials and netizens lament that people are still failing to obey safety rules, including a ban on visiting during the hari raya celebrations last month, which led to numerous clusters forming.
malaysia was on a partial movement control order at the time, and it remains to be seen how seriously people will take the current tightened measures.
just days before a total lockdown kicked in on tuesday, massive traffic jams were seen at highways and there were hordes of panicked shoppers at supermarkets, sparking the hashtag #rakyatgagal, or "citizens fail", on twitter.
"where are you headed this weekend?
mass movement is still happening despite interstate and inter-district travel restrictions," health director-general noor hisham abdullah said in a facebook post on saturday, sharing photos of traffic at highway toll plazas.
twitter user itsfikaa wrote: "this is not #kerajaangagal (failed government) anymore.
this is also #rakyatgagal.
the rising cases are mostly from cluster aidilfitri.
don't you get it?
this is a total human failure.
you blamed the government but why did the aidilfitri cluster increase day by day?
"according to senior minister for security ismail sabri yaakob, 200,000 people faked their way through police roadblocks to return to their home towns for hari raya, using fabricated "emergencies" to get police letters or misusing work letters.
"as a result, after hari raya, there were many clusters and also deaths," he said at a joint press conference with tan sri dr noor hisham on sunday.
despite regular reminders sent by the authorities to malaysians on their phones that they should stay at home, wear their masks when out and wash their hands often, many are not paying attention.
a viral video that stunned netizens last month showed an elderly man who had tested positive for covid-19 being kissed and hugged by family members before he was taken away by ambulance with medical workers wearing full protective gear.
the chinese-language china press daily later reported that the man's son and other family members were also positive and under home quarantine.
on monday, three nurses were fined rm4,000 (s$1,290) each after a social media post revealed that they had visited a friend who was under home quarantine as a close contact of a covid-19 patient.
reports have also emerged that more than 52,000 people nationwide have missed their vaccination appointments.
tan sri dr noor hisham tweeted last saturday that he expects the number of daily cases to surge to 13,000 by mid-june, and that it may take three to four months to flatten the curve, through a combination of public health measures and increasing vaccination rates.
a doctor at a government hospital near kuala lumpur, who declined to be named, predicted a peak within the next two months.
"the actual numbers are likely to be more than those reported.
we are seeing daily admissions to our hospital, and our intensive care unit is also half full with covid-19 patients.
it is going to peak in june to july," the doctor said.
newer, more infectious variants of the virus, coupled with the failure to follow the rules of prevention, are also responsible for the rise in numbers, said the government's covid-19 epidemiological analysis and strategies task force chairman, professor awang bulgiba awang mahmud.
"even if this lockdown is really strict, it would still require two to three months to bring the numbers down to a manageable level.
i suspect that the newer variants have an infectious period longer than two weeks, possibly as long as 21 days.
the question is whether the authorities will allow a lockdown long enough to see a real effect," he told the straits times.
meanwhile, some are putting down the disregard for rules to ignorance.
science teacher stephan ong, 45, said: "i'm appalled at how poor the general population is when it comes to understanding basic science.
the fact that we have to explain to people how to wash their hands properly and with soap, how to wear a mask properly, and how vaccines work, is a sign that we need to give more focus on the sciences in our education system, for the good of the next generation.
"join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
advertisementsupported byw.
h. o.  approval for a second chinese vaccine.
by melina delkicwe're covering w. h. o.  approval for another chinese vaccine, and reactions in the israeli media to the possible end of the netanyahu era.
the world health organization cleared a covid-19 vaccine made by the chinese drugmaker sinovac biotech for emergency use.
the clearance means that the vaccine could be distributed as part of covax, the global effort to share shots with hard-hit, undersupplied nations.
the decision came a month after the w. h. o.
's approval of another vaccine developed in china, by the state-backed sinopharm.
the second vaccine, known as coronavac, has already been approved for use in 29 countries, including brazil and mexico.
the w. h. o.  had recently sought more safety and manufacturing data on coronavac, the wall street journal reported.
efficacy data: clinical trials of coronavac in brazil and turkey delivered very different results, but both showed that it protected against covid-19.
on monday, brazil announced that a study in which an entire town received coronavac found that deaths from covid-19 there had dropped 95 percent.
here are the latest updates and maps of the pandemic.
in other developments:germany, greece and five other european countries began issuing a digital covid certificate for travel — recording whether users are vaccinated, have tested negative within 72 hours or have recovered from the virus.
australia's national women's softball team arrived in japan ahead of the tokyo olympics, one of the first international competitors to arrive.
the coronavirus has now claimed the lives of 32 lawmakers in the democratic republic of congo — more than 5 percent of its parliament.
china's state news media trumpeted the government's announcement that it would allow couples to have three children as a positive change.
but across much of the country, the reaction was indignation.
women worried that the move would only exacerbate discrimination from employers.
young people, who have barely been able to afford homes and necessities for themselves, were fuming.
working-class couples said it would be impossible.
on weibo, users complained of mounting education expenses, sky-high housing prices and unforgiving work hours, and pointed out a shortage of child care options.
many people have to rely on their parents to help with their kids.
some millennials are choosing a kid-free lifestyle, and many men are having vasectomies to ensure they remain childless.
quotable: one commenter on an article on the policy change said: "get out of here!
will you help us take care of the kids?
will you give us a house?
"related: china has nearly quintupled the acreage of public green space in its cities over the past 20 years to satisfy the demands for parks and better quality of life from a more affluent and educated populace.
after more than 12 consecutive years at the helm of israel's government, prime minister benjamin netanyahu's hold on power may be coming to a close.
naftali bennett, an ultranationalist power broker, said he would cooperate with opposition leaders to form a coalition to replace netanyahu.
israeli newspapers from across the political spectrum offered reactions that were as fractured as the electorate.
liberal columnists said netanyahu and his allies would make things harder for the new government; conservative pundits expressed dismay at the coalition; and ultra-orthodox writers warned of an "anti-jewish" government.
quotable: "if this were a hollywood movie, now would be the part in which someone would quietly walk into the room, lay a heavy hand on the speaker's shoulder, and say to him: 'sir, it's over.
no one believes a single word you're saying.
you've made your bed.
now you need to lie in it,'" wrote ben caspit, a columnist for maariv and a vocal critic of netanyahu.
authorities in sri lanka opened an investigation into the crew of a cargo ship laden with toxic chemicals that has burned off the nation's coast for 12 days, spilling debris into the ocean.
the biden administration on tuesday said it will suspend oil drilling leases in the arctic national wildlife refuge that were issued in the waning days of the trump presidency.
a clothing shop assistant in seoul followed a belgian ambassador's wife out of the store, stopped her in the street and checked the label of her jacket to make sure it had not been shoplifted.
the woman slapped the shop assistant.
it has turned into a diplomatic brouhaha.
the pope broadened the catholic church's definition of sexual abuse to explicitly acknowledge that adults, and not only children, can be victimized by priests.
president biden will meet with surviving members of the 1921 massacre in tulsa, okla. , when angry whites descended on a prosperous african-american part of the city, killing as many as 300 people and destroying more than 1,250 homes.
giovanni brusca, an italian mobster who admitted to involvement in more than 100 killings before becoming an informer, has been released after serving 25 years in prison.
a morning readnaomi osaka dropped out of the french open after organizers fined her for failing to turn up at a news conference.
osaka cited mental health reasons for her refusal to talk to the media.
one of the takeaways from the whole affair may be that some players really do find it all too much to bear.
our sports reporter looked at what went wrong, what we know and what we don't know.
the globe theater of shakespeare's day survived multiple outbreaks of the plague.
so when the pandemic shuttered live performances in london last march, many expected the modern recreation of the globe to make it through.
it hasn't been easy.
the theater, which relies heavily on tourism, let go of 180 freelance actors and crew, and furloughed most permanent staff members.
even with those cuts, executives said, the globe might have shut down if not for the british government's arts bailout.
the globe reopened last month at a quarter of its usual capacity.
to cut down on costs, it's staging a revival of a 2019 production of "a midsummer night's dream. "
actors must maintain social distancing onstage, and plays are running without an intermission to reduce virus risk.
the times culture reporter alex marshall recently headed to the globe for its first performance in over a year.
the mood outside, he reported, was ecstatic.
"it's just great we're back and people are hungry for it," sean holmes, the play's director, said.
"we can't sustain at this level of audience by any means, but i'm feeling optimistic.
"what to cookmake a quick, elegant dinner of roasted fish with cherry tomatoes.
what to watchthe fifth and final season of "kim's convenience," the canadian sitcom that explores korean food culture without leaning into stereotypes, arrives on netflix.
relaxa pool can be soothing before you wade into its waters.
take a look at these aerial photos.
now time to playhere's today's mini crossword, and a clue: practical joke (three letters).
and here is today's spelling bee.
you can find all our puzzles here.
that's it for today's briefing.
see you next time.
— melinap.
s.  christina morales, who has reported for our express desk, is our newest food reporter.
the latest episode of "the daily" is about the tulsa race massacre.
sanam yar wrote the arts and ideas.
you can reach melina and the team at briefing@nytimes.
com.
advertisement
tokyo: japanese fans and public figures rallied in support of tennis star naomi osaka on tuesday (jun 1), offering sympathy after she withdrew from the french open and opened up about her battles with depression.
the four-time grand slam winner's career is followed closely in japan and the controversy in paris, which followed her refusal to attend press conferences, led news bulletins on tuesday.
reaction in japan was largely sympathetic, with one twitter user urging osaka to "take a good, long break".
"i hope she gets to eat what she wants, watch what she wants and listen to what she wants.
i hope she wraps herself up in a fluffy blanket and takes it easy until she feels content.
"osaka revealed that she has "suffered long bouts of depression" after pulling out of the french open on monday, and will "take some time away from the court".
her withdrawal follows the fall-out from her decision to boycott press conferences at the tournament, which she said were like "kicking people when they are down".
osaka is expected to represent japan at the tokyo olympics, and will be one of the host country's highest-profile athletes at the games if she takes part.
but japanese fans urged her to take care of herself first and foremost.
"i will be happy as a fan if she can restore her energy after this and make a comeback," a 45-year-old who gave his name as hoshino told afp in tokyo.
"i dare say she might withdraw from the tokyo olympics," wrote one twitter user.
"it's disappointing, but i hope she takes her time and gets well.
""can't imagine the pressure"others welcomed osaka's openness about her mental health, a subject rarely discussed by public figures in japan.
former tennis player ai sugiyama told a morning show she hoped osaka's actions could "make a splash and create an opportunity to talk about athletes' mental health", the sports hochi reported.
"there's a big difference between people's personalities, and i think we need to consider things on a case-by-case basis," said sugiyama, who reached a career-high number eight world ranking.
"i think the system where you absolutely have to turn up and you're fined if you don't is a little outdated.
"tokyo passer-by ishikawa nobuyuki, 74, told afp osaka's withdrawal was "unavoidable", adding that "media also has some responsibility" for her wellbeing.
"she has the obligation to do the interviews, regardless of whether she wins or loses.
ignoring that makes her slightly selfish.
but then again, she has an illness," he said.
some twitter users questioned whether osaka was feeling the strain of competing for titles and speaking out against racial injustice.
"naomi osaka is fighting against herself, against pressure, against fixed ideas, against discrimination," tweeted tv presenter ruriko kojima.
"all these things surely cause her anguish.
i just can't imagine the pressure she carries on her shoulders.
it's such a different perspective.
i hope she gets some time where she can laugh and relax.
"it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
sri lanka is facing one of the worst environmental crises in its history as tons of potentially toxic debris from a fire aboard a container ship blanket miles of its western coastline.
the south asian country's military said it had subdued the blaze aboard the mv x-press pearl over the weekend, after more than a week of raging flames and billowing black smoke.
but officials and scientists warn that the maritime disaster is far from over, with billions of plastic pellets washing up on beaches up to 75 miles to the south.
as sri lankan sailors scrape the debris from beaches and the ship smolders, scientists are trying to determine how far the flotsam will travel and what the damage will be.
"it's an environmental disaster," sri lankan marine biologist asha de vos told the washington post.
she said she worries currents could eventually carry the plastic pellets as far as the other side of the island nation, killing wildlife and damaging sensitive ecosystems.
the crew of the x-press pearl first spotted smoke rising from the cargo hold on may 20 while anchored not far from the port of colombo, according to x-press feeders, the company that operates the singapore-flagged ship.
they tried to extinguish the fire by releasing carbon dioxide in the hold, but the fire grew and an explosion rocked the recently built ship on may 22, the company said.
the 25-person crew was evacuated as the sri lankan navy tried to suppress the blaze, with help from the indian coast guard and firefighting tugs belonging to a dutch company.
infrared footage of the ship taken over the weekend  showed the fires had almost gone out.
sri lankan authorities suspect the fire was caused by a leak from the ship's containers, which were carrying 25 metric tons of nitric acid.
(the chemical is used in fertilizers as well as explosives.
)in an interview with shipping industry publication splash, x-press feeders executive chairman tim hartnoll said poor packaging was responsible for the leak, which the crew had detected while in the arabian sea.
according to an x-press feeders statement, the ship applied to the western indian port of hazira and the qatari port of hamad to offload the leaking container, but the requests were denied.
"the advice given was there were no specialist facilities or expertise immediately available to deal with the leaking acid," the company said.
"it was a case of not in my backyard syndrome," hartnoll told splash.
sri lankan officials said monday a special police team had begun investigating as the government seeks to take legal action against the vessel's owners over the incident, the associated press reported.
the ship was also carrying 78 metric tons of plastic pellets, or nurdles, according to mongabay, an environmental news organization.
some of them poured into the ocean and began washing up on the coastline.
yellow-sand beaches normally popular with sri lankan and foreign tourists quickly became covered in the tiny granules.
"it was nuts," said de vos, who is also executive director of the marine conservation and education organization oceanswell.
"it was basically [plastic] snow on our beaches, these tiny white pellets, and piles of them.
"the government banned fishing along around 50 miles of coast, a significant blow for a country where the industry makes up about 2 percent of its economy.
dead fish have begun washing up on beaches.
authorities have warned people not to touch the debris from the ship because it could be contaminated with harmful chemicals.
beaches known for their crabs are now crawling with thousands of members of the military in protective suits.
adding to the pain is a national lockdown restricting movement in the country, said muditha katuwawala of pearl protectors, another sri lankan marine conservation organization.
"it has been difficult to mobilize any volunteers," he said, adding that the spill was "by far the worst marine environmental disaster in our region.
"it could take a long time to understand the full impact of the disaster.
for example, plastic mixed into the sand could raise the temperature of beaches where sea turtles lay their eggs, leading to all-male or all-female broods, de vos said.
the plastic "will be in our beaches for a long time to come.
"as she and other scientists track where the pellets end up, de vos hopes the shocking images raise awareness about the impact of more everyday pollution.
"our oceans are covered in microplastics, but nobody really thinks about it," she said.
"i hope this drives home that we are all part of this problem.
"the most important news stories of the day, curated by post editors and delivered every morning.
by signing up you agree to our terms of use and privacy policy
there are ample supplies of food and essential items but people should buy only what they need, said trade and industry minister gan kim yong yesterday.
during a virtual press conference, he said singapore is working with malaysia to ensure the continued flow of essential supplies between the two countries as malaysia imposes a two-week lockdown from today till june 14. mr gan, who co-chairs the multi-ministry task force on covid-19, said the government has been working with relevant agencies and companies to build up singapore's existing stockpile and further diversify its sources of food and essential items, while also increasing local production.
the economic agencies are also working with firms especially those dealing with essential goods and services to minimise disruption to their supply lines, he added.
"as the pandemic continues to evolve globally, we must remain prepared and vigilant as a nation, while staying flexible and adaptable," mr gan said.
he noted the overall impact of phase two (heightened alert) measures on singapore's gross domestic product is expected to be modest, with the effects to differ across various sectors.
domestic consumer-oriented sectors, such as food and beverage services, retail, and land transport will be harder hit, while the impact on more outward-oriented sectors such as manufacturing and finance is likely to be less severe.
on saturday, mr gan visitedfairprice's distribution centre in joo koon and a cold warehouse at local logistics firm ych's supply chain city to better understand the measures put in place to ensure sufficient food and essential supplies for all.
singapore imports an array of products from malaysia, including food items such as chicken and vegetables.
malaysia's lockdown means that only essential economic sectors will be allowed to operate.
the country saw new highs in covid-19 infections and deaths last month.
this article first appeared in the straits times.
get the new paper on your phone with the free tnp app.
download from the apple app store or google play store now
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
beijing (afp, reuters) china reported the world's first human infection of the h10n3 bird flu strain on tuesday (june 1) but said the risk of it spreading widely among people was low.
the man, a resident of the city of zhenjiang, was hospitalised on april 28 after developing a fever and other symptoms, the nhc said in a statement.
he was diagnosed as having the h10n3 avian influenza virus on may 28, it said, but did not give details on how the man had been infected with the virus.
"the risk of large-scale spread is extremely low," the nhc said, adding that the man was in a stable condition and his close contacts had reported no "abnormalities".
it described h10n3 as low pathogenic less likely to cause death or severe illness in birds.
the man was stable and ready to be discharged from hospital.
medical observation of his close contacts had not found any other cases.
the nhc said there had been no human cases of h10n3 previously reported in the world.
h10n3 is a low pathogenic, or relatively less severe, strain of the virus in poultry and the risk of it spreading on a large scale was very low, the nhc added.
the strain is "not a very common virus", said filip claes, regional laboratory coordinator of the food and agriculture organisation's emergency centre for transboundary animal diseases at the regional office for asia and the pacific.
only around 160 isolates of the virus were reported in the 40 years to 2018, mostly in wild birds or waterfowl in asia and some limited parts of north america, and none had been detected in chickens so far, he added.
analysing the genetic data of the virus will be necessary to determine whether it resembles older viruses or if it is a novel mix of different viruses, claes said.
several strains of bird flu have been found among animals in china but mass outbreaks in humans are rare.
the last human epidemic of bird flu in china occurred in late 2016 to 2017, with the h7n9 virus.
the h7n9 has infected 1,668 people and claimed 616 lives since 2013, according to the united nations' food and agriculture organisation.
following recent avian flu outbreaks in africa and eurasia, the head of china's centre for disease control and prevention last week urged stricter surveillance in poultry farms, markets and wild birds.
covid-19 was first detected at a food and animal market in the central chinese city of wuhan in late 2019. join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
a 41-year-old man in china's eastern province of jiangsu has been confirmed as the first human case of infection with the h10n3 strain of bird flu, china's national health commission (nhc) said on tuesday (june 1).
the man, a resident of the city of zhenjiang, was hospitalised on april 28 after developing a fever and other symptoms, the nhc said in a statement.
he was diagnosed as having the h10n3 avian influenza virus on may 28, it said, but did not give details on how the man had been infected with the virus.
h10n3 is a low pathogenic, or relatively less severe, strain of the virus in poultry and the risk of it spreading on a large scale was very low, the nhc added.
[[nid:476028]]the man was stable and ready to be discharged from hospital.
medical observation of his close contacts had not found any other cases.
many different strains of avian influenza are present in china and some sporadically infect people, usually those working with poultry.
there have been no significant numbers of human infections with bird flu since the h7n9 strain killed around 300 people during 2016-2017. no other cases of human infection with h10n3 have previously been reported globally, the nhc said.
 share copieda human infection from the h10n3 avian influenza virus was reported in east china's jiangsu province, china's national health commission said on tuesday.
the patient, a 41-year-old male living in zhenjiang city, is currently in stable condition and meets discharge standards.
health authorities said the case was a sporadic virus transmission from poultry to human, and the risk of causing a pandemic was extremely low.
copyright â© 2020 cgtn.
beijing icp prepared no.
16065310-3copyright â© 2020 cgtn.
beijing icp prepared no.
16065310-3copyright â© 2020 cgtn.
beijing icp prepared no.
16065310-3
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore a doctor has been suspended for five months for trying to sell an erectile dysfunction drug to a man who was not his patient.
although the man did not end up buying the drug, which is regulated, the singapore medical council (smc) felt that dr ho tze woon's two attempts at providing it were conduct that "fell short of that expected of medical practitioners".
the disciplinary tribunal also took into account a third charge, which was not proceeded on.
this relates to his downloading of "pornographic or obscene materials onto the computers of six consultation rooms at the choa chu kang polyclinic where he worked" between october 2014 and july 2016. the doctor pleaded guilty to the charges but said in mitigation that he had not sold the drug, which was also not addictive, unlike medication containing codeine.
the smc received a complaint from the police on the attempted sale of the drug.
it is not stated how the police had found out.
the tribunal said in its published grounds of decision that this was likely the first time such a case has come up in a disciplinary hearing.
this case was of "a doctor attempting to sell a regulated medicine/drug, ostensibly obtained in a proper manner originally for his own medical condition, to someone who is not a patient," it said.
the first transaction failed because the man had refused to accept the drug, cialis, as the packaging was damaged.
the deal fell through a second time after they could not agree on the price.
while the tribunal agreed that no actual harm was caused, as the sale did not materialise, the incident does affect public confidence in the profession.
"doctors are able to dispense medicines and drugs in the poisons act without a licence from the proper authority because that is a privilege granted to doctors who are treating patients under their care," it said.
"this trust in the medical profession would be impacted because of the callous way dr ho disregarded the medical ethics guidelines and rules.
"although dr ho said he was only trying to help the man get the drug more cheaply, the tribunal said "it does not appear that dr ho was entirely altruistic about his intentions", based on the text messages between the two men.
dr ho had quoted $203 for a box of 28 pills, including goods and services tax (gst), followed by an exchange of text messages on oct 23, 2017, with the man (mr c).
mr c: btw, why r u charging gst?dr ho: not me, its suppliermr c: supplier?
i'm not even getting a receipt!mr c: like this it's not much diff from buying from clinic!dr ho: ok 190 is ok.  u coming or not?mr c: otw.
$180?the tribunal concluded that dr ho's intent to supply cialis to the man for a price could not be clearer and more palpable.
that the sale did not take place is irrelevant, it said.
the tribunal's verdict, published on tuesday (june 1) on the smc website, was to impose a five-month suspension and a $2,000 fine.
dr ho was also censured and has to pay the cost of the proceedings.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore — "zat, do you know why f&b workers are not given priority for covid-19 vaccination?"
chef dylan ong asks over direct chat on instagram the week when phase 2 (heightened alert) started.
his question came amidst a press conference where the newly-minted minister for health, ong ye kung, announced a new vaccination strategy that extends the time between doses so that the maximum number of people can be protected.
students between the ages of 12-15 will also be eligible for the pfizer biontech vaccination.
phase 2 (ha) was announced due to the rising number of unlinked covid-19 cases and the emergence of clusters in singapore with his round of tightened measures spanning 16 may to 13 june 2021.  some of the limitations enforced by phase 2 (ha) are reduced social gathering size to two people (down from five) and reenacting working from home as a default.
dining-in would also no longer be allowed at all f&b outlets across the island, including at hawker centres, coffee shops, and food courts.
for some of the chefs and restaurant owners, i spoke to, this outright ban on dining-in left them blindsided and reminded them a lot of what happened in april last year when singapore enacted circuit breaker measures for three months.
"i was surprised because i thought any new wave would have been mitigated by our collective efforts of mask-wearing, social-distancing, and the usage of contact tracing apps," willin low, chef and founder of wild rocket, shared with me over whatsapp.
"also, don't we have very stringent border controls that include swab tests and strict quarantine measures?
"chef dylan was running lunch service at his restaurant, the masses, when he heard of the announcement on friday, 14 may.
"it was too short a notice for something this drastic to happen by sunday.
for restaurants, saturday will definitely be a full house, especially when it's the last day of dining-in before phase 2 (ha) kicks in.
how do i find time to pivot to full delivery service over one day?
""yes, i know we have done this before," dylan went on to say.
"but it would have been so much better had the government given us an earlier heads up.
i know it's a critical situation that requires decisive decision making.
i expected the government to be more sensible than to dole out this knee-jerk reaction.
"the question of priority vaccination for f&b workersto be completely honest, i've never questioned why people working in the f&b industries weren't given priority for vaccination—at least not until dylan asked.
his concerns, though, were understandable.
in phase 3 that commenced on 28 dec 2020, dining in a group of up to 8 people was permitted.
up until the announcement of phase 2 (ha), eating at restaurants remained the only close contact group activity where masks can be taken off during the entire meal duration—presenting a higher possibility for the virus to spread if safe distancing measures and sanitisation procedures weren't properly adhered.
the perilous state of dining-in was further exacerbated by recent reports that the kopitiam food court at changi airport terminal 3 was visited by several confirmed cases, some of which have already been vaccinated.
changi airport would eventually be named as one of the largest active clusters in phase 3, swelling to more than 100 people.
"a thousand things went through my mind when the ban on dining-in was announced.
but my foremost worry was the safety of my staff, especially since this new b16172 variant is said to be more infectious than the last," said chef johanne siy of lolla at amoy street.
"my greatest concern was both the drop in sales and the increased number of cases that might put my colleagues at risk," dominic tan, founder of ajumma's, shared.
"the daily rise in cases also doesn't assure us that the restrictions will last for only one month.
"minister lawrence wong, co-chair of the covid-19 multi-ministry task force, has since remarked that the current phase 2 (ha) measures are working and that no further tightening is expected.
concerns over employabilityearly this year, phase 3 measures brought some much-needed relief for f&b establishments affected by circuit breaker measures.
some chef-owners i spoke to last month in march even lamented the lack of staff to handle the onslaught of reservations from diners—customers with money to spare and nowhere to spend it except locally through staycations and to dine out at restaurants.
this aura of upbeat positivity has drastically taken a tumble, even if only based on anecdotes.
while circuit breaker seems more a test of inventiveness and how pivot-ready f&b businesses are, phase 2 (ha) is shaping up to be solely about survivability.
"i guess in a way, we are more prepared today than previously as we have at least experienced it once and know what to expect," said chef willin.
"the main challenge now is how to ensure all my colleagues, and i keep our jobs.
"it's a concern shared by the co-founder of apollo coffee bar, shirlynn eng.
"to us, the team is family, and despite the circumstances, our priority is to make sure that our employees will be taken care of.
many of our crew have families both in singapore and internationally—these countries include malaysia, vietnam, and the philippines.
""so our priority is clear.
to do whatever it takes to support and sustain their livelihood.
"concerns over long-term financial stabilitychef dylan readily admits that, like many other chefs, he's now more operationally prepared for delivery and takeaway services even with a tight runway of one day.
but at its core, he posits that the problems and issues remain the same.
f&b owners tend to run with a tight financial capital—any form of disruption in dining-in revenue will most certainly hit them hard.
"unfortunately, it's even harder now as we're unsure what financial support we can get from the government to tide us over.
will there be rental rebates for this one month also?
none of us knows.
"although not immediately announced—and in some ways quite telling of how rushed these phase 2 (ha) measures are—rental relief for smes was recently introduced on 28 may 2021 by finance minister lawrence wong.
under the rental support scheme, privately owned commercial properties can look forward to getting a half month rental relief cash payout directly from the inland revenue authority of singapore.
"from a business standpoint, i think it will be so much harder to survive this round," said chef johanne.
"there's so much more competition from established players and new home-based businesses.
it seems idealistic, but i hope everyone can find a place in the sun and somehow find a way to survive.
"balancing the new normal:sg phase 2 heightened alert: 6 cocktail delivery options for libation loversfoodies rally to patronise ailing elderly hawkers as diners asked to stay homesg phase 2 heightened alert: 10 f&b outlets that deliver familiar comfort food to your homesg phase 2 heightened alert: 11 restaurants that deliver a touch of luxe to your doorstepindonesian restaurant the rice table closing down after 24 yearsnew entrants caught by surprisebusinesses that are only beginning to recoup losses from the three-month circuit breaker are joined by brave f&b entrepreneurs who have delayed the opening of their restaurant concepts to may this year, only to be greeted by the news that dining-in will be banned again for one month.
it is a situation chef jeremy chiam, formerly of now-shuttered le binchotan, is familiar with.
three weeks ago, chiam launched iko, a mod-jap restaurant and bar serving up contemporary japanese fare, robata-grilled bites, as well as a curated collection of sake and japanese-inspired cocktails.
"iko is only three weeks old, and i'm once again facing a ban on dining-in.
it's a new brand that has, unfortunately, come to a standstill after all that marketing effort we put out; it's heartbreaking.
"it's now evident that with every enactment and tightening of covid-19 measures, the industry where the effects are most keenly and immediately felt is in the f&b sector.
according to the singapore department of statistics, f&b sales registered a year-on-year decline of 26% in 2020.  it was the worst-performing year since the growth rate was first recorded back in 1986, surpassing the asian financial crisis in 1998, sars in 2003, and the global financial crisis in 2009. in dollar terms, retail and f&b sales registered a decline of about s$4 billion during circuit breaker.
could phase 2 (ha) measures be better mitigated?with such sobering statistics gleaned from circuit breaker last year, i wondered how the sudden ban on dining-in, and in retrospect, phase 2 (ha) measures could have been better mitigated, especially given that we have experience and prior knowledge on hand.
for dominic, government mitigation and intervention could have been offered earlier, even before phase 2 (ha) measures were enacted.
"i feel that earlier support to manage crowds at f&b establishments could have been put in place, such as encouraging landlords to allow installation of clear perspex or acrylic sheets within the restaurants to create a safer dining environment for diners," said dominic.
dylan, however, was less enthused about how the government went about handling the ban on dining-in.
"we have done this before.
why are we still so lacking in how we prepare the people of singapore for such drastic measures?
government leaders were put in place so they can have better foresight than us ordinary citizens.
this kind of knee jerk reaction speaks volumes of the kind of leaders we have now.
""i'm just extremely disappointed with how this is being handled," dylan went on to add.
in our initial interview, willin wondered if there could have been a more gradual easing in of restrictions by cutting down the number of diners allowed per group instead of implementing such a drastic and sudden outright ban.
"but in view of the 38 local transmissions today (16 may 2021), i guess what the government is doing regarding the ban on dining-in does not seem too out of line, given how infectious this new strain is," said willin a few hours after the number of new community cases was announced.
when life gives you lemonswhile waiting for dining-in to resume, some restaurants are taking a 'when life gives you lemon' approach to the pivot rerun to delivery and takeaway.
at birds of a feather, chef eugene see has put together food bundles featuring signature dishes from the restaurant and its four sister brands.
there's the "french toast" from halcyon & crane, "salmon grain bowl" from 51soho, "king prawn noodles" from chuan hung noodle stall and the signature "find the chicken in the chillis" from birds of a feather.
"by offering this bundle, we hope our customers can experience what we can offer for our food delivery at a group level, and at the same time, bring the best food items to their doorsteps," chef eugene shared.
at shirlynn eng's five cafe concepts—apollo coffee bar, neptune cafe, columbus coffee co. , lunar coffee brewers, and atlas coffeehouse—diners can look forward to the 'choux box', a care package iteration inspired by the first circuit breaker.
then, shirlynn witnessed first-hand the rising practice of people gifting their friends or loved ones 'care packages'.
there's also an encouraging response to the care packages shirlynn rolled out at the time.
as the end date for phase 2 (ha) on june 13 draws to a close, chefs and restaurant owners wait with breath that is bated for dining-in to resume and, for many of us ordinary citizens, for life to regain some semblance of normalcy—however that may look.
undoubtedly, these are tough times for the f&b sector, made more challenging with razor-thin profit margins, disruptions in the supply of raw ingredients due to tightened border controls, and, funnily enough, a vibrant local dining scene with every operator eager for a slice of the proverbial pie.
perhaps shirlynn puts it best.
"we just want our friends, family, and customers to live a little amidst this tough time, love a lot, and laugh over these delightful treats.
it's perhaps exactly what we need these days to get through these four weeks—joy and spontaneity.
"balancing the new normal:sg phase 2 heightened alert: 6 cocktail delivery options for libation loversfoodies rally to patronise ailing elderly hawkers as diners asked to stay homesg phase 2 heightened alert: 10 f&b outlets that deliver familiar comfort food to your homesg phase 2 heightened alert: 11 restaurants that deliver a touch of luxe to your doorstepindonesian restaurant the rice table closing down after 24 yearswatch more lifestyle videos on yahoo tv:thoroughbreds: a murderous upper-class gambit from anya taylor-joy two school friends reconnect over their lack of empathy and hatch a deadly plan in this marvellous 2017 thriller • thoroughbreds is streaming in australia on netflix.
for more recommendations of what to stream in australia, click here dynamite performances: olivia cooke and anya taylor-joy in thoroughbreds.
photograph: claire folger/focus features"thor: love and thunder" is eight months out from its premiere in theaters.
but franchise star chris hemsworth couldn't wait another day to release the hounds.
on instagram tuesday hemsworth revealed shooting has wrapped on the film — and showed off a set of guns that very well could surpass the bodybuilder golden mean of 20 inches.
"that's a wrap on thor love and thunder," he wrote, standing alongside "thor" writer, director and actor (he plays korg) taika waititi, who as you'll see is fully re,,.
,,.
robert hogan, a longtime tv actor who appeared on more than 100 different tv shows over a six-decade career, has died.
he was 87.  hogan passed away on may 27 from pneumonia, his family announced in an obituary.
he was diagnosed with vascular alzheimer's disease in 2013.  hogan's first tv roles came in the 1960s and include "hazel," "the donna reed show," "gomer pyle: usmc," "the twilight zone" and "dr.  kildare. "
in the 1970s, he would appear in "i dream of jeannie," "gunsmoke," "the mary tyler motesla ceo elon musk continued to get the company into trouble with the securities and exchange commission last year because of his reckless twitter habits, according to a new report from the wall street journal.
the journal reported tuesday that it had recently acquired documents from last may when the sec wrote tesla a letter chiding the company for not complying with a court order to review his social media posts.
in 2019 and 2020 musk posted several tweets about tesla's stock price and its sogabrielle union and zaya wade are a fashionable duo.
,《》《》,,!cameron boyce's final film "runt" will hit theaters this fall after 1091 pictures acquired the north american rights to the feature thriller, the distributor announced tuesday.
nicole elizabeth berger, aramis knight, cyrus arnold, jason patric and tichina arnold also star in the directorial debut of william coakley, based on a script by coakley, christian van gregg, and armand constantine.
"runt" made its world premiere at the 2020 mammoth film festival where it received a standing ovation and t"gone with the wind," "birth of a nation" and, more recently, woody allen's "manhattan," are movies that should be explained rather than forgotten, a panel of top film critics said in thewrap's second in its series "conversations on cancel culture. "
washington post critic ann hornaday said that a new generation of viewers see these films as problematic, and critics need to frame them appropriately.
"their expectations have fundamentally changed in terms of what they see as acceptable behavior, akate winslet fought for her character in hbo's hit drama "mare of easttown" to look as natural as possible, she recently told the new york times.
according to the times, winslet said she rejected several posters for the show that she felt were too airbrushed and insisted "mare of easttown" director craig zobel keep a "bulgy bit of belly" that winslet shows in a sex scene with co-star guy pearce.
"don't you dare," winslet said she told zobel.
the "titanic" star and heroine in "mare of easttown" s「」,,,.
!the tiny home has so many handmade details—including a realistic alexander calder–inspired chandelier.
work with the white house coronavirus task force led anthony fauci to choose an apt title for his upcoming book.
but the length, at 80 pages, raises questions about its depth.
fauci is calling his new book "expect the unexpected: ten lessons on truth, service, and the way forward. "
the book, announced by publisher's lunch, is published by a national geographic imprint and due out november 2.  preorders went live this week on amazon and total $18, plus tax.
the book's description says it is compilafter a year spent overhauling her diet and exercise habits, rebel wilson is looking fitter than ever and she's not shy about sharing the results of her hard work with the world.
in a new series of photos posted to instagram, the actor poses in a plunging black swimsuit and hat during a trip to palm beach, florida.
view this post on instagram a post shared by rebel wilson (@rebelwilson)"palm beach-ing 🏝 i think i wanna move to florida now," she captioned the photo.
wilson, who has lost a total ofall asset classes.
industry-leading prices.
user-friendly investing online.
it's traditional at first glance, contemporary up close.
this story about "night stalker" first appeared in the race begins issue of thewrap's emmy magazine.
making a documentary about sadistic serial killer richard ramirez, also known as the night stalker, was no easy feat for filmmaker tiller russell.
the director/producer knew he would have to respect the victims' trauma while showcasing ramirez's crimes, which were extremely violent in nature.
by anchoring the story in the perspective of gil carrillo, one of the detectives who helped solve the casrambutan, bakuchiol, rosehip oil—do they really work?here is what whole mouth dental implants should cost you in your areawhere do i get this top though??
😍🔥president biden is commemorating the centennial of "the single worst incident of racial violence in american history," according to the oklahoma historical society, and until two years ago, most americans had never even heard of it.
june 1 marks the 100th anniversary of the day the tulsa race massacre came to a close, a harrowing event in which a white mob destroyed the greenwood district, a prosperous tulsa neighborhood known as "black wall street. "
over 35 city blocks were burned to the groundthe walt disney company has been his with a sexual orientation discrimination lawsuit by a television production executive who says he has faced various forms of mistreatment since his sexual orientation became known at the company.
joel hopkins, who is currently a vice president of production finance at abc signature, says in court documents that he began his career at disney at 1994, working for buena vista television.
he says he was promoted twice in his first six years with the company.
but!here's how to make the most of the shopping season.
don't worry, there's no feud brewing here.
"mare of easttown" ended on sunday, when the kate winslet-led limited series drew nearly 3 million viewers across a combination of hbo platforms.
adding in memorial day catch-up, and that number grows to 4 million, according to hbo.
happy memorial day weekend, home box office, now go celebrate with your favorite hoagie at wawa.
those numbers make the "mare" finale the limited series' most-watched episode.
the streaming portion of the viewership make the "mare of easttown" finale the most-watched
pope francis has changed the roman catholic church's laws to explicitly criminalise sexual abuse.
it is the biggest overhaul of the criminal code for nearly 40 years.
the new rules make sexual abuse, grooming minors for sex, possessing child pornography and covering up abuse a criminal offence under vatican law.
the pope said one aim was to "reduce the number of cases in which the.
.
.
penalty was left to the discretion of authorities".
the changes to the code of canon law took 11 years to develop and included input from canonist and criminal law experts.
the catholic church has been rocked in recent years by thousands of reports of historic sexual abuse by priests, and cover-ups by senior clergy, around the world.
victims and critics had complained for decades that the previous laws were outdated, designed to protect perpetrators and were open to interpretation.
the new code replaces the last major changes made by pope john paul ii in 1983.  it is designed to have clearer and more specific language, and dictates that bishops must take action when a complaint is made.
the new rules come into effect on 8 december.
they also prohibit the ordination of women, recording confessions and committing fraud.
the vatican's law also now recognises that adults as well as children can be victimised by priests who abuse their authority.
previously, the church believed adults could give or withdraw consent because of their age, and did not take into account that adults could also be victims, especially if there is a power imbalance.
the code says a priest can lose their position if they used "force, threats or abuse of his authority" to engage in sexual acts.
for the first time, laypeople working within the church system, such as administrators, can also face punishment for abuse, such as losing their jobs, paying fines or being removed from their communities.
the new rules criminalise "grooming" of minors or vulnerable adults to pressure them to take part in pornography.
it is the first time the church has officially recognised grooming as a method used by sexual predators to exploit and abuse victims.
the law has also taken away the discretionary power that had previously allowed high-ranking church officials to ignore or cover up allegations of abuse to protect priests.
now, anyone found guilty of this could be charged with negligence in failing to properly investigate and punish sexual predators.
monsignor filippo iannone, who leads the vatican department that oversaw the changes, said there had been "a climate of excessive slack in the interpretation of penal law", where mercy was sometimes put before justice.
the changes come under the new heading of "offences against human life, dignity and liberty," which replaces the previously vague "crimes against special obligations".
the new laws do not spell out sexual offences against minors, but instead still refer to offences against the sixth commandment, which prohibits adultery.
advocates have long demanded the church remove the reference to the sixth commandment, and define the abuse as a crime against children instead of a violation of priestly celibacy.
"describing child sexual abuse as the canonical crime of 'adultery' is wrong and minimises the criminal nature of abuse inflicted on child victims.
a canonical crime relating to child sexual abuse should be clearly identified as a crime against the child," said a 2020 report into child sexual abuse, sponsored by the uk government.
pope francis has worked to tackle sexual abuse allegations involving catholic priests since he became pontiff in 2013.  he led a landmark summit on clerical sex abuse in 2019, and lifted the controversial rule of "pontifical secrecy" in a bid to improve transparency.
the church previously shrouded sexual abuse cases in secrecy, in what it said was an effort to protect the privacy of victims and reputations of the accused.
critics said some church officials abused the rule to avoid co-operation with police in abuse cases.
roman catholic church admits abusechildren tell of neglect, filth and fear in us campschina's sinovac covid vaccine gets who approvalit is the second chinese vaccine to get the green light from the global health body.
world's largest meat supplier hit by cyber-attackbiden to suspend trump arctic drilling leasesthe villagers caught between sparring asian giantsnew china child policy sparks tales of 'trauma'two children, a decade of war.
videotwo children, a decade of warthe rise and fall of a drug kingpinâs wifethe legacyâ of theâ murder of james byrd jr.  videothe legacyâ of theâ murder of james byrd jrthe indian children orphaned by covid-19south korea: from food wasters to recyclers.
videosouth korea: from food wasters to recyclerspregnant, unprotected and living in fear of covidabducted activist points finger at pakistan securitylyrics quizhave you been getting these songs wrong?feeling hotwhat happens to your body in extreme heat?world's largest meat supplier hit by cyber-attack1china's sinovac covid vaccine gets who approval2belarus activist 'stabs his neck' in court3the rise and fall of a drug kingpinâs wife4biden first president to mark tulsa race massacre5zero daily covid deaths announced in uk6infamous sicilian mafia boss released from prison7brazil defends hosting of copa america tournament8huawei operating system coming to asia smartphones9what happened when a whole town got covid jabs?10â© 2021 bbc.
the bbc is not responsible for the content of external sites.
read about our approach to external linking.
kalvin ho, one of the 47 pro-democracy activists charged under the national security law for participating in an unofficial primary election last year, was denied bail in march/afpdozens of leading hong kong democracy activists could face up to life in prison for organising an unofficial primary election, prosecutors confirmed monday, in the most sweeping use yet of beijing's strict new security law.
police charged the 47 activists with "subversion" after they organised a non-binding vote last year to choose candidates for an ultimately postponed local election.
the defendants say they were simply taking part in opposition politics.
but authorities accused them of a "vicious plot" to subvert the government by seeking a majority in the city's partially-elected legislature.
on monday the defendants appeared en masse for the first time in nearly three months at a hearing in which a judge granted a request by prosecutors to have the case upgraded to the city's high court.
offences heard in that court start at seven years imprisonment for those who are convicted.
the maximum penalty under the new security law is life in prison.
beijing has moved to quash dissent in the semi-autonomous city after huge and sometimes violent pro-democracy demonstrations in 2019. the security law criminalises anything authorities deem to be subversion, secession, terrorism or collusion with foreign forces.
police and prosecutors have since applied the law broadly with the vast majority of those charged for political speech.
under the new law — which beijing imposed directly on the city last june — defendants may only be granted bail if they can persuade a court they no longer pose any kind of national security risk.
that clause has removed hong kong's common law tradition that maintains a presumption of bail for non-violent crimes.
monday's proceedings were the first time the public was able to see most of the defendants since early march when the vast majority — 36 — were denied bail at a mammoth hearing.
that hearing dragged on for so many days that some of those in the dock collapsed from exhaustion.
bail decisions published since that hearing have revealed that judges are deciding whether some of those in custody still pose a potential security risk.
claudia mo, a former lawmaker, was denied bail partly because of whatsapp messages with foreign journalists in which she commented on news and political events.
another former lawmaker jeremy tam saw his application turned down in part because the united states consulate invited him by email for a "catch up" — even though the email went unanswered.
in both instances judges argued the fact that the two defendants remained influential meant denial of bail was needed.
china says the national security law is needed to restore stability.
critics say it has eviscerated the freedoms hong kong was promised ahead of its handover and has rapidly begun to change city's vaunted, business reliable common law traditions.
— afp © 2006 2021 the online citizen© 2006 2021 the online citizen
gst voucher payments, worth $1.
3 billion, will be disbursed to about 1.
4 million singaporeans and 950,000 households this month, according to the ministry of finance (mof) on tuesday (jun 1).
singaporeans who are eligible for the regular gst voucher (gstv) – cash payment will also be eligible for a one-off $200 gst voucher – cash special payment.
this is on top of the gstv regular cash payment of either $300 or $150 according to the annual value of your home.
this scheme will be available from june 23 onwards, and 90 per cent of eligible singaporeans will receive the payouts automatically.
meanwhile the regular gstv will be credited to their bank accounts from july 30. in february, with the emerging stronger together theme, the government announced additional help for singaporean families via the budget 2021 household support package – amid the economic downturn caused by the covid-19 pandemic.
lower and middle income families will be receiving more support from this package during this period of uncertainty.
singaporeans who do not have a paynow-nric-linked bank account but have previously provided their bank account number to the government, will receive their payouts via bank transfer on june 30.  meanwhile the rest will receive cheques in their official address mailbox from july 15 onwards.
in total, lower income citizens will be qualified to receive up to $500 – to defray their cost of living, benefiting over 1.
4 million singaporeans.
additionally, eligible hdb households will receive an additional 50 per cent of their regular gstv – u-save, via the one-off gstv – u-save special payment scheme.
furthermore, close to 575,000 singaporeans who are aged 65 and above in 2021 will also receive a top-up to their cpf medisave accounts of up to $450 from july 30 onwards.
these top-ups will amount to almost $170 million in total.
visit here for more details on the gst voucher.
xavierpoh@asiaone.
com
beijing: fifteen tutoring firms have been hammered with millions of dollars of fines over alleged fraud, chinese state media said on tuesday (jun 1), as the government's chastening of the tech sector seeps into the private education businesses.
the groups including major brands like zuoyebang, which counts alibaba as an investor, and tencent-backed yuanfudao were hit with fines amounting to 36.
5 million yuan (us$5.
7 million).
after issuing fines and warnings to tech companies spanning e-commerce, gaming, video streaming and food deliveries, beijing has in recent days turned its attention towards tutoring start-ups, many of them online.
the penalties follow a warning by president xi jinping in march of problems in the education sector, including excessive pressure on young students.
a number of potential initial public offerings for companies running learning apps have since ground to a halt, reported bloomberg news on monday, naming both zuoyebang and yuanfudao among those that were holding off preparations.
the education ministry also plans to create a division overseeing private education platforms, the report added.
on tuesday, china's market watchdog said an investigation into the 15 institutions which include online apps alleged they had engaged in "false advertising", with many also found to have conducted "price fraud".
for example, bond education is accused of inflating a package of trial classes to 420 yuan and offering it at an apparent discount of 12 yuan, state broadcaster cctv reported.
among other wrongdoings were "fabricating teacher qualifications, exaggerating the effects of training .
.
.
and fabricating user reviews", according to the state administration for market regulation.
the services aimed to induce parents to fork over money, said regulators.
this follows similar practices by zuoyebang and yuanfudao that authorities flagged in may, including a false claim by zuoyebang of a collaboration with the united nations.
intense competition starting from a young age has amplified the pressure on china's parents to pay extra to get their children ahead in the congested education system.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
by helen regan and sophie jeong, cnnupdated 1325 gmt (2125 hkt) june 1, 2021  (cnn)a huge cleanup operation was underway for a sixth day in sri lanka tuesday after a container ship laden with chemicals caught fire 12 days ago, inundating the country's western coastline with microplastic pollution and potentially hazardous waste.
cnn's angus watson in sydney contributed reporting.
singapore has "ample supply of food and essential items" but people should buy only what they need, said minister for trade and industry gan kim yong on monday (may 31), on the back of supply concerns arising from malaysia's two-week lockdown.
singapore:  singapore has "ample supply of food and essential items" but people should buy only what they need, said minister for trade and industry gan kim yong on monday (may 31).
mr gan's comments came on the back of supply concerns arising frommalaysia's two-week lockdownfrom jun 1 to jun 14.  singapore imports several products from malaysia, including chicken, fish and vegetables.
"we are working with malaysia to ensure the continued flow of essential supplies between our two countries," said mr gan, speaking at a covid-19 multi-ministry task force.
the government has been working closely with relevant agencies and companies to build up existing stock, further diversify its sources of food and essential items while also increasing local production, he said.
"i want to assure everyone that we have ample supply of food and essential items.
but please remember to only buy what you need," said mr gan, who is also co-chair of the task force.
economic agencies in singapore are working with companies, especially those dealing with essential goods and services, to minimise disruptions to their supply lines, he added.
mr gan visited supermarket chain fairprice and home-grown supply chain solutions company ych over the weekend to better understand the measures that have been put in place to ensure that there is sufficient food and essential items for all, he said.
describing the covid-19 situation as "extremely fluid", mr gan said that as the pandemic continues to evolve globally, singapore must remain prepared and vigilant as a nation while staying flexible and adaptable.
speaking after prime minister lee hsien loong's address on singapore's strategy against covid-19, mr gan said that the next few months are "critical".
"we are in a race with the virus.
the virus will attempt to spread wider and faster, and therefore we need to do more and do faster too, in vaccination, testing and contact tracing," he said.
impact expected to be "modest"touching on the potential impact of the tighter covid-19 restrictions during phase 2 (heightened alert) on singapore's economy, mr gan said that he expects the overall impact to be modest.
"the impact of the measures will differ across different sectors.
domestic, consumer-oriented sectors, such as food and beverage services, retail, and land transport, will see a greater impact," he added.
"on the other hand, the impact of these measures on outward-oriented sectors of the economy, such as manufacturing and finance and insurance, is likely to be less severe.
"last friday, finance minister lawrence wong announcedmore support measuresfor businesses affected by the tightened measures, extending wage subsidies to more sectors.
"even as we do our best to manage the situation at hand, mti will continue to give businesses, our full support to help them transform and seize new opportunities when they arise," said mr gan.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore pregnant women and cancer patients on active treatment are among the sub-groups of individuals that can also be vaccinated, said the multi-ministry task force (mtf) in an update on monday (may 31).
the task force noted that more people have been vaccinated both globally and locally, providing more evidence on the efficacy and safety of vaccine use.
this is especially in relation to specific sub-groups where clinical trial data had not been as substantive.
health minister ong ye kung said: "we can now be more inclusive in administering vaccinations.
since the start of the vaccination exercise, a few sub-groups have not been included, mostly because of medical reasons.
"but the expert committee on covid-19 vaccination has reviewed global and local data relating to these sub-groups and is satisfied that vaccination is safe and efficacious for many of them, he added.
pregnant women will be able to register and book a vaccination appointment from friday if they are part of the population group eligible for vaccination.
but mtf added that they should discuss the risks and benefits with their doctors to make an informed decision on the vaccination.
singapore's director of medical services, associate professor kenneth mak, said this applies irrespective of a woman's stage of pregnancy.
if a woman becomes pregnant after getting her first dose, she can proceed with the second as well.
"there is currently no evidence to suggest that the pfizer-biontech or moderna covid-19 vaccines may cause harm to pregnant women or their babies," mtf said.
"however, the committee recognises that the amount of data collected on this population segment is still much smaller compared to data on the general population.
"it added that it is also safe for women who are breastfeeding to be vaccinated and they do not have to suspend breastfeeding to receive the vaccine.
meanwhile, cancer patients on active treatment can also be vaccinated, mtf said.
but they should do so in a hospital setting, after assessment by their treating specialists on their suitability.
active treatment includes chemotherapy, immunotherapy or radiation therapy that individuals have undergone in the past three months or plan to undergo in the next two months.
under the current guidelines, cancer patients on hormonal therapy can continue to be vaccinated at any available vaccination site.
mtf said: "cancer patients on active cancer treatment remain a vulnerable population that is at an increased risk of complications from covid-19.
"there is currently no evidence of any safety signals or increased rates of adverse events from mrna-based covid-19 vaccines for this group.
"the expert committee is also finalising guidelines on vaccination for cancer patients on treatment, including those who consult private specialists.
additionally, those with severe cutaneous adverse reactions, which are rare drug-induced disorders, can also receive the vaccine.
such reactions include the stevens-johnson syndrome a rare, serious disorder of the skin and mucous membranes; toxic epidermal necrolysis a reaction where the skin blisters and peels, and can be life threatening; and severe hypersensitivity and rash.
these people may go to the vaccination centres, if they are part of the population group that is eligible.
mtf said the committee is also reviewing the safety data on people with a history of anaphylaxis, which is a severe allergic reaction that can kill unless treated promptly, to allow more to be safely vaccinated.
the review aims to be completed in the next two weeks and will set out guidelines.
mr ong said: "specifically, the committee is reviewing the restriction for those who are not allergic to the mrna vaccine or its components, but to other substances like seafood, painkillers, antibiotics.
"he added that the review will take about two weeks with the intention of removing these restrictions and allowing more individuals in this group to be eligible for vaccination.
"this is quite a sizeable group of over 30,000 individuals.
so the lifting of these restrictions will be a fairly meaningful one.
"read next: 6 key announcements from pm lee hsien loong's address on covid-19 plansjoin st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore: the warm and humid weather in may is expected to continue into the first half of june, the meteorological service singapore (mss) said on tuesday (jun 1).
in the first fortnight of june, the nights are also expected to be warm and humid, with night-time minimum temperatures of up to 28 degrees celsius expected on some days.
warm nights typically occur when the prevailing winds blow from the southeast and brings warm, humid air from the sea over the land, mss said.
the daily temperature is forecast to range between 25 degrees celsius and 34 degrees celsius on most days, with the mercury potentially hitting 35 degrees celsius on a few days when there are few clouds in the sky.
the prevailing light and variable winds over singapore and the surrounding region are forecast to strengthen and blow from the southeast or southwest.
this signals the end of the inter-monsoon period and the start of the southwest monsoon season, which typically extends into september and is a generally drier season compared to other times of the year.
the monsoon rain band is forecast to lie over the northern southeast asia region, bringing generally dry, warm, and humid conditions over singapore and the surrounding region on some days.
on several days, there will be localised short-duration showers, at times with thunder, over a few parts of the island in the late morning and early afternoon.
"on one or two days, sumatra squalls moving from the strait of malacca to the south china sea are expected to bring island-wide thundery showers with occasional gusty winds in the morning," said the met service.
the overall rainfall for the first half of june 2021 is likely to be below normal over most parts of singapore.
review of may weatherin its review for the weather last month, the met service said that inter-monsoon conditions prevailed over singapore and the surrounding region, and the prevailing winds were generally light and blew from the east, southeast or southwest.
thundery showers fell over parts of the island on most days, mainly in the late morning and afternoon.
they were due to strong daytime heating of land areas, a convergence of winds over singapore and the surrounding vicinity, or a combination of both factors, the met service said.
the heaviest thundery showers during the month occurred on may 17 and may 18, particularly over the western and central parts of the island.
on both occasions, a convergence of winds over singapore and the surrounding vicinity brought thundery showers in the late morning, early afternoon and in the night.
in may, the highest rainfall of 117.
2mm was recorded on may 17 at jurong west, while the highest daily total was 132.
0mm, recorded at toa payoh.
"climatologically, may is one of the warmest months of the year," said the met service.
the highest daily maximum temperature recorded across the island was at least 34 degrees celsius on 18 days, with the peak 35.
7 degrees celsius recorded at marina barrage on may 11. there were also a few warm nights where the night-time temperature was around 28 degrees celsius, particularly over the south-eastern part of the island.
rainfall was slightly above average for most parts of singapore in may.
the highest rainfall anomaly of 69 per cent above average was recorded at jurong.
the anomaly was lowest at kranji at 56 per cent below average.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
by jeffrey hellerjerusalem (reuters) long the familiar face of israel, benjamin netanyahu has held on as prime minister for more than a decade, clinging to power through a criminal indictment and four elections in the past two years alone.
now, the question is whether the 71-year-old netanyahu, dubbed "the magician" by his admirers, has any cards left up his sleeve.
after years in which he exerted near-complete hegemony over israeli politics, an emerging broad coalition of opponents could be about to unseat him.
"fraud of the century," an indignant netanyahu declared on sunday, after fellow right-winger naftali bennett turned against him and opted to align with centrist opposition chief yair lapid despite a public promise that he wouldn't.
and while netanyahu's likud party has remained unflinchingly loyal to him, gideon saar, a disillusioned likud defector, is in line to join the new government-in-making as head of his own new horizon party.
israeli political commentators said the political knives have been out for a while for netanyahu, the country's longest-serving leader.
a sense that he was living on borrowed time after 12 consecutive years in office was compounded by a corruption trial now under way.
the cases involve alleged favours to media tycoons and illegal receipt of expensive cigars and champagne.
netanyahu has denied all wrongdoing and says, without offering any evidence, that he is a victim of a deep state conspiracy against him.
don't count him out yet, political commentators warn.
"it's still too early to declare that (the) "bibi era" of israeli politics has ended.
but if change is ultimately achieved, netanyahu will have been toppled by his colleagues on the right, who had it with his leadership," aluf benn, editor of the left-wing haaretz newspaper, wrote on monday.
gracious in defeat?popularly known by his childhood nickname, bibi, netanyahu is the son of a historian and attended high school and college in the united states, where his father taught.
never lost for a soundbite, his booming baritone hasresounded on the world stage since serving as israel's ambassador to the united nations from 1984 to 1988.  entering politics in israel as a likud legislator, he became party leader in 1993. netanyahu last lost the premiership, in his first term, before the turn of the millennium.
his gracious handover after a 1999 election to then-labour party leader ehud barak would seem almost impossible today, in the context of netanyahu's frequent social media sniping against his rivals.
at a changing of the guard in the prime minister's office, netanyahu and his wife sara smiled as they shook hands with barak and his spouse and chatted amiably with the couple with a glass of wine in their hands.
this time around, if lapid meets a wednesday deadline to form a new government with bennett slated to go first as prime minister in a "rotation" deal netanyahu will likely be ready to pounce as leader of the opposition.
in a possible taste of things to come, a stern-looking netanyahu went on television on monday to decry the creation of a "dangerous, left-wing government".
the tone of his remarks like "fraud of the century" has unavoidable echoes of his closest international ally, himself now unseated, former u. s.  president donald trump.
the diverse composition of an alliance of left-wing, centrist and right-wing parties would make it particularly unstable in a country so riven by political divisions that "do-over" elections have become the norm.
but for netanyahu's loyalist voters, popularly dubbed "bibists", he remains a leader tough on security and a bulwark against pressure, even from trump's successor president joe biden, for any bold steps that could lead to a palestinian state.
pro-netanyahu sentiment was still alive in southern israel this month, even as the area again came under intensive rocket attack from hamas in gaza.
"thank goodness we have a strong prime minister, bibi netanyahu," one resident said, without a hint of sarcasm, on israeli tv as he stood outside his parent's home after it was hit for a second time by a rocket during 11 days of fighting.
(editing by william maclean)we look at both industrial reits to suss out which makes a better buy.
the post better buy: keppel dc reit vs mapletree industrial trust appeared first on the smart investor.
all 26 hua zai eating house outlets will be closed from 1 june for two weeks and re-open on 15 june following the detection of covid-19 cases linked to an outlet at anchorvale, the ministry of health (moh) said on tuesday (1 june).
spinningfields,,, 65-6,,!malaysia scrambled jets to intercept 16 chinese military aircraft off the country's coast in the south china sea, a rare incident that the foreign minister angrily denounced tuesday as an "intrusion".
china has jailed a popular blogger for "defaming martyrs" after he suggested the death toll of the china-india border clash last year was higher than the official count of four.
missed out on the recent hdb bto may sales launch?
don't fret.
there's another hdb bto sales launch scheduled for august 2021.  if you've missed may's launch, there's also the august 2021's launch where you can expected an estimated 4,900 units across seven locations up [.
.
. ]
the post hdb bto launches in 2021 (bukit batok, tengah, kallang – whampoa, toa payoh – bidadari, woodlands, bukit merah, geylang, hougang, jurong east, queenstown, tampines) appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
,hk$1,000!
!thousands of doctors across india wore black armbands on tuesday calling for the arrest of a hugely popular guru who has claimed yoga can prevent covid-19 and that conventional medicine has killed thousands of coronavirus patients.
if you've got a citibank credit card, you're in luck.
here are the deals you can enjoy as a citibank credit cardmember (on top of the credit card's own perks).
a well-known global bank, citibank offers some of the best credit cards in singapore.
it [.
.
. ]
the post citibank credit card promotions and deals: june 2021 appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
israeli politicians battling to unseat veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu have until just before midnight wednesday to make their "change" coalition, composed of bitter ideological rivals, viable.
《!》ut,!covid-19 variants are to be known by letters of the greek alphabet to avoid stigmatising nations where they were first detected, the world health organization announced monday.
the employers of an american journalist detained by myanmar authorities said monday they were yet to receive any information on his whereabouts or wellbeing, a week after he was detained.
china has relaxed its family planning policy to allow couples to have three children after a census showed its population is rapidly ageing, state media reported monday, further unwinding four decades of controls in the world's most populous nation which have strangled the birthrate.
,,.
,,.
the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
one: full blast might've been a quick replacement for one: empower, but the martial arts spectacle delivered plenty of exciting action.
the show, which aired on friday, 28 may, featured a one super series muay thai main event between a pair of top contenders and a flyweight co-main event between rising stars.
in the evening's final .
.
.
continue reading "saemapetch kos kulabdam, xie tkos agasa at one: full blast"these renewable insurance standalones cost very little in defraying very large medical bills.
in case you are looking out for protection against infectious diseases, something that has become increasingly commonplace, you might be glad to know that many personal accident insurance plans have turned hybrid [.
.
. ]
the post best personal accident insurance plans in singapore (2021) appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
!smartdon don donki,,5%,smart!a major us-australia joint military exercise will go ahead this year despite pandemic concerns but will be significantly scaled-back, a senior australian military officer said tuesday.
china on tuesday denied an australian academic's claims that he had been tortured in custody during his two-year detention on espionage charges.
the vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap) aims to provide singaporeans with an added layer of peace of mind when they choose to be vaccinated.
the post vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap): how much will moh be insuring for serious side effects related to covid-19 vaccination?
appeared first on dollarsandsense.
sg.
!the ministry of health (moh) on monday (31 may) confirmed the detection of 23 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,051. a senior australian cabinet minister on monday dropped a high-profile defamation suit against public broadcaster abc over its publication of rape allegations that helped spark nationwide protests.
the opec group of oil-producing countries and its allies agreed tuesday to maintain planned production increases, as pandemic-hit demand for crude recovers.
people's voice party chief lim tean on tuesday (1 june) clarified that he did not modify the video recording of a homily delivered by singapore's roman catholic archbishop that the politician had posted on his own facebook page.
a homily is a commentary that follows a reading of scripture that offers a "public explanation of a sacred doctrine" or text.
footage of the homily — a homily delivered by archbishop william goh on 25 july last year — was reportedly doctored with a label titled "appropriate sermon for pap (people's action party) cabinet".
mr lim, who is also a lawyer, said that he "did not edit any part of it or add" to the video of archbishop goh's homily.
"this video was sent to me on 29 may by a fellow montfortian.
i posted the video on my fb as i received it," he said.
mr lim explained that he had decided to share the video on facebook as he believed it carried "a very valuable message on leadership whatever the sphere a leader may be involved in – whether it be in religion, politics, business or otherwise".
"as i said in my post, the message in the video is timeless.
those who watched the video in my post were similarly impressed with the archbishop's message as can be seen from their reactions," he said.
noting that he has removed his facebook post of the video "out of respect for the wish of the catholic church", mr lim affirmed that he has "the greatest respect for the catholic church and archbishop william goh".
"i used to be a regular attendant at his friday teachings at the catholic seminary opposite the church of nativity, before his elevation to the office of archbishop of singapore," he said.
"below is a picture of the church of nativity at the cross-roads of upper serangoon road and punggol road.
my primary and secondary school montfort used to be located to the left of the church.
on the other side of the church was chij," he said, referencing a photograph he had attached to his clarification.
the roman catholic archdiocese of singapore on monday earlier said that the homily in question centres "the privilege of being chosen as a leader and how a true leader is not concerned about rewards but rather focused on serving and enriching others".
"leadership is ultimately about servanthood and the joy of being a leader is when they see the lives of others transformed," said the church in its statement yesterday.
"however, by putting the label "appropriate sermon for pap cabinet" – it has caused upset and concern to the church and its followers as the doctored label leads to a misrepresentation of the intent and thrust of the homily.
"the church hopes that respect is given to religious materials such as homilies and other materials written or recorded on audio and video," it said.
taking the homily out of its intended context from an "emotional frame of mind" and a need to further certain "causes" creates "misunderstanding and sows discord and division", the church added.
"the church does not practise partisan politics.
we seek only to proclaim the good news of jesus christ, bring good to society, promote harmony, unity and mutual understanding among all peoples.
"we, therefore, ask all parties concerned to refrain from doctoring the church's videos or images, stop the distribution, and remove such content from their social media accounts or postings," it said.
the church also urged people to be "vigilant" against fake news.
quoting a statement from pope francis in jan 2018, it said that no person can "feel exempted from the duty of countering these falsehoods".
"this is no easy task, since disinformation is often based on deliberately evasive and subtly misleading rhetoric," the pope remarked.
in the homily he delivered in july last year, the archbishop emphasised the importance of humility in leadership, saying that a "true leader is not concerned about rewards" or "what he can get out of it".
"a true leader is concerned about serving the people.
about enriching the people, about empowering the lives of people .
.
.
he is more concerned about his responsibilities, the task given to him assigned to him, to look after those that the lord has entrusted to him," he said.
archbishop goh added: "if you are looking for earthly rewards, monetary rewards, you are not a leader.
you're a leader for yourself, not for the people.
"leaders, he stressed, "must be ready for suffering". "
don't seek leadership if you are not ready for suffering, to be misunderstood, to be slandered, to be taken for granted, to be used and abused," said the archbishop.
watch: the video recording of archbishop william goh, the roman catholic archbishop of singapore, delivering a homily on leadership in july last year.
the left upper corner's text have been mosaiced off.
© 2006 2021 the online citizen© 2006 2021 the online citizen
subtotalcalculating.
.
.
coupon (free50)s$0.
00shipping chargecalculating.
.
.
subtotal (excluding taxes)calculating.
.
.
gstcalculating.
.
.
order totalcalculating.
.
.
download our mobile app to bring our news with you on the go.
check your email for more details.
do you want to customise your notebook now?
want our latest singapore corporate news stories for
                      
                      free
                      

                    follow our telegram, facebook for the latest updates round the clock
                thank you!please check your email inbox to confirm your newsletter subscription.
unlimited access to all stories from $99.
9/year*the latest reporting and analysis from business and investments to news and views on social issues.
bonus:
end of contentno more pages to loadjune 01, 2021may 31, 2021may 31, 2021june 01, 2021may 28, 2021
               want our latest singapore corporate news stories for 
               free
               

                    follow our telegram, facebook for the latest updates round the clock
                thank you!please check your email inbox to confirm your newsletter subscription.
follow us© all rights reserved.
2021. the edge publishing pte ltd.
opinion by ahshel pfefferupdated 2234 gmt (0634 hkt) may 31, 2021 anshel pfeffer(@anshelpfeffer) is a writer for ha'aretz and the israel correspondent of the economist.
he is the author of "bibi: the turbulent life and times of benjamin netanyahu. "
the views expressed here are his own.
read more opinion at cnn.
(cnn)on sunday night, naftali bennett, the right-wing politician who may become israel's new prime minister in a week, finally broke cover and lambasted his old boss and mentor benjamin netanyahu for trying to lead the state of israel to his own "personal masada" -- a reference to the jewish zealots who committed mass suicide rather than become roman slaves in the first century a. d. sign up for cnn opinion's new newsletter.
join us on twitter and facebook
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore it is not possible for residents of one block of flats to catch covid-19 from residents in a neighbouring block via the wastewater system, infectious disease experts said on tuesday (june 1).
on monday, all residents of two housing board blocks in hougang 501 and 507 in avenue 8 were asked to go for mandatory tests after covid-19 viral fragments were detected in wastewater samples collected from the blocks.
the two blocks are within the same area as block 506 hougang avenue 8, which saw its residents mass-tested for the virus after a few patients were found to be living there.
the ministry of health (moh) had identified 11 covid-19 cases from at least four households in the block, including two that were picked up during the testing exercise.
professor paul tambyah, president of the asia pacific society of clinical microbiology and infection, said: "detection of covid-19 fragments in wastewater does not mean that was the mode of transmission – it is a screening tool to pick up the presence of individuals who are shedding the virus. "
in response to queries, a pub spokesman said that sanitary systems here are "closed systems" where the pipes are air- and watertight to ensure that no foul air, viruses or bacteria can travel between household or blocks.
"for instance, water seals located in the u-shaped sections of underfloor pipes in the toilet bowl and floor traps for sinks, wash basins and showers act as barriers to prevent foul air that may contain bacteria and viruses from entering a unit's premises," the spokesman added.
"these water seals are maintained by regular water flow from the sinks, wash basins, showers or flushing of the water cisterns.
"he added that sanitary pipes are hydraulically and air-pressure tested by licensed plumbers to ensure no leakage in the system.
"backflow of used water will not occur in a properly designed system like singapore's, where the used water flows in pipes with proper gradient and is conveyed in a downward direction quickly through vertical down pipes," he said.
professor dale fisher, an infectious disease expert at the national university of singapore (nus), said that the infected residents of block 506 may have transmitted covid-19 to their neighbours in blocks 501 and 507 through other means, such as a contaminated surface.
professor teo yik ying, dean of nus' saw swee hock school of public health, said: "it could be that there are people who are asymptomatically infected in these blocks, and we should not rule out the possibility of false detection as well.
"it is otherwise too early to speculate how the covid-19 fragments could have been detected if there are truly no infected cases in these blocks.
"rather than viral spread through the sewage system, prof tambyah said "it is far more likely that people living in adjacent blocks visited each other, and, hence, the wastewater surveillance picked up the positive cases in the adjacent blocks".
"or, even more likely, there was a common source like a nearby coffeeshop that has yet to be identified," he added.
testing for residents in the two blocks began on tuesday and will end on thursday.
when the straits times arrived at block 507 in hougang at about 9am on tuesday, testing operations were in full swing and residents had formed a queue to get swabbed.
leader of the opposition pritam singh speaking to residents queueing at block 507 hougang avenue 8.  st photo: jason quah

aljunied grc mp gerald giam (left) and hougang mp dennis tan speaking to residents at block 507 hougang avenue 8.  st photo: jason quah
madam koh beng hup, who works in a mcdonald's outlet, said: "i'm not worried about myself because i feel fine.
but i'm worried that someone in the block might have the virus.
"i've always been a careful person.
i wash my hands when leaving home or coming back.
"the 60-year-old added that the swabbing process took only about five minutes from start to finish.
mrs sasikala ramaiyan, who helps out at a minimart in block 501, said she will be tested on wednesday.
"testing is just a precaution, there's nothing wrong with that.
we don't know for sure, but we have to face whatever that comes.
we cannot panic," said the 41-year-old.
"it's good that they are testing everyone.
we don't have to guess whether this person or that person has the virus.
whoever tests positive will be isolated, and the government can take the necessary precautions.
"over at block 745 yishun street 72, testing was also under way for its residents.
moh had announced the tests on monday after six covid-19 cases were detected in the block, with subsequent wastewater tests detecting virus fragments.
testing for the yishun block will end on wednesday.
residents of block 745 yishun street 72 queueing for their mandatory covid-19 swabs on june 1, 2021.  st photo: desmond foo

testing for the yishun block will end on june 2, 2021.  st photo: desmond foo
on tuesday, prof teo and prof fisher also shared their opinions on a message circulating that the earlier infections in hougang's block 506 could have spread through the sewage system to residents living in the same "stack" meaning they share the same unit number but are on different floors.
referring to the cases in block 506, the message said: "suspect cause of transmission is the wc (water closet), when flushing wc air from other units get into the toilet and infect the guys.
"the message also urged recipients to put down their toilet covers before flushing.
prof fisher said: "the 'column' of cases is in itself remarkable, but i would think contamination of an elevator or stairwell is more likely in seeing this pattern.
"prof teo said that transmissions through the sewage system between units in the same stack are unlikely, except in the case of leakages in the wastewater piping, or if a wastewater system had not been properly installed.
both said that closing toilet lids before flushing is a good practice, as toilet plumes from flushing can disperse aerosols containing waste materials.
separately, the national environment agency (nea), which is in charge of wastewater testing for covid-19, said that, as at may, it has expanded the wastewater surveillance programme to about 110 locations.
this includes singapore's four water reclamation plants, workers' dormitories and other high-population density living premises such as nursing homes and student hostels.
"we continually assess the situation together with other agencies on wastewater surveillance points to complement clinical testing," said an nea spokesman.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore allowing access to vaccines that are already in use elsewhere will give people in singapore more options, said dr danny soon, a member of the expert committee on covid-19 vaccination.
he was speaking at a live panel discussion on tuesday (june 1) on living with covid-19 organised by the straits times.
more than 30,000 people here are not able to take the pfizer-biontech and moderna mrna vaccines approved for use in singapore because of medical reasons.
the mrna vaccines have led to some people developing allergic reactions both here and overseas.
people with a history of a potentially life-threatening reaction known as anaphylaxis have been advised not to take these vaccines.
the ministry of health said on monday that it would allow unregistered new covid-19 vaccines through the private healthcare sector.
such vaccines use different vaccine technology to help the body create immunity against the virus that causes covid-19.
they include the viral vector vaccines from johnson & johnson and oxford-astrazeneca as well as the inactivated virus vaccine from sinopharm.
all of them have been approved by the world health organisation (who) for emergency use and are already in use in other countries.
while this would give people here more options, the government will not subsidise the cost of these vaccines, and anyone who chooses to get these jabs will not be eligible for the vaccine injury financial assistance programme for covid-19 vaccination should they experience serious adverse effects.
dr soon, chief executive of the consortium for clinical research and innovation, singapore, said the suggested cause of some allergic reactions could be certain ingredients in the mrna vaccine lipid nanoparticles, which envelop the mrna molecules to protect them and help them enter human cells.
so, "some diversity" in vaccine types would be useful.
these include inactivated virus vaccines, and those that use a viral vector or a safe, modified virus as a delivery system.
these vaccines also provide slightly different immune responses, so one thing that is being looked at is whether or not to mix vaccine types to get broader immune coverage.
this entails giving one type of vaccine first, and another type as booster shots.
dr soon said the exacting storage conditions for the mrna vaccines can be an issue.
"there are still some parts of the supply chain for which they need to be stored at minus 70 deg c. "he said viral vector vaccines are "much more robust", as they are more stable and can be stored at fridge temperatures.
the one-shot johnson & johnson vaccine and the two-dose vaccines use viral vector technology.
they use a harmless, weakened adenovirus "common" viruses that cause illnesses like colds to carry genetic instructions into the body to prompt cells to mount an immune response.
inactivated virus vaccines like the sinopharm and sinovac vaccines use actual coronaviruses taken from infected patients.
"they are inactivated through chemical means, and so they are no longer alive and they can't replicate and they can't cause disease," said dr soon.
the body mounts an immune response to the coronavirus proteins, and this helps a person build up immunity, he explained.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore: motorists who commit traffic offences in silver zones and school zones will face higher fines and additional demerit points from jul 1, the ministry of home affairs said on tuesday (jun 1).
fines will be increased by s$100 while an additional two demerit points will be incurred for specified offences committed in these zones.
these include offences committed at pedestrian crossings, such as failing to slow down or give way when approaching crossings, and offences related to driving behaviour that endanger pedestrian safety, such as speeding or driving against the flow of traffic.
first announcedby minister of state for home affairs desmond tan on mar 1, the move aims to make roads safer for elderly pedestrians as well as students by strengthening deterrence against irresponsible driving.
in a media release, mha said: "elderly pedestrians continue to account for a disproportionate number of traffic accidents resulting in pedestrian fatalities in 2020, the elderly made up more than 80 per cent of pedestrian fatalities.
"while jaywalking by elderly pedestrians contributed to some of these accidents, many accidents also arise from irresponsible driving behaviour on the motorist's part, such as failing to slow down when approaching a pedestrian crossing.
"the situation may be improved with greater care on the part of motorists.
"the number of traffic accidents resulting in elderly pedestrian casualties increased from 223 in 2015 to 317 in 2019.  this number declined to 233 in 2020, however, the decrease may have been a result of reduced road and pedestrian traffic due to the covid-19 pandemic, mha said.
silver zones, introduced in 2014, are located in areas with a large population of senior citizens.
these zones typically have a lower speed limit of 40kmh and additional traffic-calming and senior-friendly road safety features, such as additional crossing points and narrower lanes to slow down traffic.
school zones, which are demarcated areas fronting schools, also have enhanced road safety features, with a reduced speed limit of 40kmh during three time blocks on school days and whenever school events are in progress.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore a doctor has had his licence suspended for four months for bringing disrepute to the profession.
he was caught taking upskirt videos of two women in 2016. dr deshan kumar rajeswaran was caught in the act at an ntuc fairprice supermarket at amk hub in july that year.
the police and the attorney-general's chambers served him a 24-month conditional warning in october 2016.  he satisfied the condition of refraining from similar or other criminal conduct.
the singapore police force had informed the singapore medical council (smc) of the incident and of the warning issued.
in december that year, the smc filed a letter of complaint to the chairman of its complaints panel.
this panel looks at all complaints and decides if any has merit and, if so, the action that needs to follow.
in april 2017, a complaints committee was set up to investigate the matter.
the doctor, a consultant rehabilitation physician at the department of rehabilitation medicine at tan tock seng hospital, admitted to the fault in august that year.
he said that his actions were done on impulse as a result of a prolonged period of stress and anxiety at work and at home.
in his written explanation, dr deshan said he had sought psychiatric help, and had been attending psychological therapy sessions, as well as maintaining good physical, emotional, psychological and social support systems.
the committee issued a letter of advice to the doctor in december 2017, encouraging him to continue with his treatment.
in january 2018, the smc wrote to the minister for health appealing against the committee's decision.
in may 2019, the ministry of health (moh) directed the smc to appoint a disciplinary tribunal to look into the matter.
dr deshan was informed in march 2020.  because of the circuit breaker measures for covid-19, the pre-inquiry conference was delayed till june.
the tribunal said the harm caused was "moderate", but culpability was low as it had not been premeditated.
it noted that the doctor had been "suffering from persistent depressive disorder" at that time, caused by stress both at work and at home.
he has been treated for this and it no longer affects him.
however, the tribunal recommends that he continues with his treatment every two to three months.
as penalty, it imposed a four-month suspension, followed by conditional registration for a year during which he may only work under supervision.
other conditions include no "private consultations without a chaperone present when attending to female patients".
he was also censured and has to pay the cost of the proceedings.
the decision was published on the smc website on june 1. join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
geneva • covid-19 variants are to be known by letters of the greek alphabet to avoid stigmatising countries where they were first detected, the world health organisation (who) announced.
the new system applies to variants of concern the most troubling of which are four in circulation and the second-level variants of interest being tracked.
"they will not replace existing scientific names, but are aimed to help in public discussion," dr maria van kerkhove, the who's covid-19 technical lead, said on monday.
under the new system, these variants of concern take on the following names: the hitherto so-called british variant b117 becomes alpha; the b1351 first detected in south africa becomes beta, while the brazilian p1 becomes gamma.
the b1617 variant first detected in india is split into sub-lineages, of which the b16172 variant of concern becomes delta.
the b16171 variant of interest is called kappa.
besides these names, there are two other scientific names in use for each mutation, while different geographic names have been used to describe the same variants.
for example, within britain, what other countries have been referring to as the british variant is often called the kent variant the county in south-east england where it was first detected.
the lineage names, such as b16172, will continue to be used in scientific circles for the mutation information that the names convey.
"while they have their advantages, these scientific names can be difficult to say and recall, and are prone to misreporting," the who said in a statement.
"as a result, people often resort to calling variants by the places where they are detected, which is stigmatising and discriminatory.
they will not replace existing scientific names, but are aimed to help in public discussion.
"to avoid this and to simplify public communications, who encourages national authorities, media outlets and others to adopt these new labels.
"last month, united states president joe biden signed a hate crimes law aimed at protecting asian americans who have suffered a surge in attacks during the covid-19 pandemic.
us anti-extremism groups say the number of attacks and hate crimes against asian americans has exploded since the beginning of the crisis.
they lay some of the blame with former president donald trump, who repeatedly referred to covid-19 as the "china virus".
the who has been trying to come up with simplified new nomenclature for the variants for several months.
the greek alphabet contains 24 letters, but there is no plan yet as to where to go next if they are exhausted.
the letters epsilon, zeta, eta, theta and iota have already been ascribed to variants of interest.
agence france-pressejoin st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.

                    tuesday, 01 jun 2021
                singapore, june 1 (the straits times/ann): to further reduce the risk of transmission at worksites, the use of antigen rapid tests (art) will now be piloted at construction worksites for those who are not living in dormitories.
these tests, which will generally be conducted once every three days, will be administered by workers through do-it-yourself covid-19 test kits, the building and construction authority (bca) said on monday (may 31).
this comes on top of the polymerase chain reaction (pcr) rostered routine testing that these workers continue to be required to take.
currently, all individuals at construction worksites, whether vaccinated or not, must be tested once every seven days or once every 14 days, depending on their risk level, such as whether they stay in dormitories.
in a circular, the bca said that each employer will appoint trained personnel as supervisors to ensure proper infection prevention controls and the correct use of the test kits.
some worksites will also designate and train specific personnel who administer the swabs for their colleagues, the bca added.
the move to pilot such self-administered tests at worksites comes after prime minister lee hsien loong's announcement on monday that do-it-yourself covid-19 test kits will soon be available at pharmacies here.
these tests, which are simple to use, can be administered by front-line workers on their own, if they wish to test themselves frequently or even daily, pm lee said.
pcr tests are the most accurate, but usually take a day or two for results to be known.
the less accurate art returns results in about 30 minutes and is used heavily for pre-event testing.
the pilot use of such art at worksites is being overseen by the bca, the ministry of health (moh) and the ministry of manpower (mom).
in its circular, the bca said it is currently engaging worksites on the pilot initiative, and that more worksites will be progressively included as singapore ramps up its supply of antigen rapid tests.
more details on the requirements and implementation of the tests will be provided when they are ready, including the necessary training and preparation required, the bca added.
moh said on monday that it will be extending the use of arts further, with pilots in student hostels in autonomous universities.
it will also work with capitaland to run pilots at one or two selected malls for tenants and people who work there.
those whose rapid test returns a positive result will need to take a pcr test at a swab and send home public health preparedness clinic or regional screening centre to confirm if they have covid-19.
they are required to self-isolate until they receive a negative pcr test result.
tags / keywords:
antigen rapid tests
                                                                ,
                                                                                                art
                                                                ,
                                                                                                construction worksites
                                                                ,
                                                                                                covid-19



report it to us.
thank you for your report!copyright © 1995-
            

 star media group berhad (10894d)best viewed on chrome browsers.
{{item['v1 header']}}
   {{item['v1 body']}}

  {{item['v2 header']}}

are you having urinary troubles?
by taking the survey, it is deemed that you consent to the termswe hope you enjoy this feature!
jerusalem: israel's health ministry said on tuesday (jun 1) it found the small number ofheart inflammation casesobserved mainly in young men who received pfizer's covid-19 vaccine in israel were likely linked to their vaccination.
pfizer has said it has not observed a higher rate of the condition, known as myocarditis, than would normally be expected in the general population.
on tuesday, it did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
in israel, 275 cases of myocarditis were reported between december 2020 and may 2021 among more than 5 million vaccinated people, the ministry said, in disclosing the findings of a study it commissioned to examine the matter.
most patients who experienced heart inflammation spent no more than four days in hospital and 95 per cent of the cases were classified as mild, according to the study, which the ministry said was conducted by three teams of experts.
the study found "there is a probable link between receiving the second dose (of pfizer) vaccine and the appearance of myocarditis among men aged 16 to 30," it said in a statement.
according to the findings, such a link was observed more among men aged 16 to 19 than in other age groups.
a us centers for disease control and prevention advisory group last month recommended further study of the possibility of a link between myocarditis and mrna vaccines, which include those from pfizer and moderna.
cdc monitoring systemshad not found more cases than would be expectedin the population, but the advisory group said in a statement that members felt healthcare providers should be made aware of reports of a "potential adverse event".
the israeli ministry released the statement, which contained no recommendations, ahead of a widely expected decision on whether to begin vaccinating youngsters aged 12 to 15 in israel.
it said a team examining that issue would make its recommendation to the ministry's director-general, but gave no date.
israeli media reports said a decision on including the 12-15 age group in the country's vaccination programme could come as early as sunday.
israel has been a world leader in its vaccination rollout.
with covid-19 infections down to just a handful a day and total active cases at just 340 across the country, the economy has fully opened, though restrictions remain on incoming tourism.
about 55 per cent of israel's population has already been vaccinated.
as of tuesday, restrictions on social distancing and the need for special green vaccination passes to enter certain restaurants and venues were scrapped.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
paying through the nose?
a pcr test for covid-19.
photograph: arun sankar/afp via gettythe cost of private covid-19 tests at home and abroad is likely to come into sharp focus in the weeks ahead as international borders reopen for leisure travel and people are allowed to go on holidays as long as they meet certain criteria.
under the rules of the digital green certificate, people will be able to move freely across the eu as long as they have been fully vaccinated, can show they have recovered from covid-19 or can produce a negative covid-19 test.
under european commission proposals, an exemption from travel restrictions will also apply to those with a negative pcr test 72 hours before departure or a negative antigen test 48 hours before departure.
countries will be able to choose which conditions it imposes and at present ireland is favouring negative pcr tests over antigen tests, a decision that could prove costly for consumers.
apart from having recovered from covid-19 the only option on the table for children and for many young adults will be a negative test, but that will add considerably to the cost of travel.
at the very least a person will have to pay about €150 to cover the cost of tests leaving the country and returning home.
but the costs at home and abroad vary wildly.
both rocdoc and randox are carrying out pcr testing at dublin airport and other locations, with the former charging €95 and the latter charging €89.
both promise results within 24 hours.
private clinics on the algarve, meanwhile, are charging €50 for tests while in spain the price is about €55.
in some countries the cost of pcr testing is determined by the government and can be subsidised or taxes are not charged.
in europe, riga airport is the cheapest, with pcr tests costing €35.
if the government adopts the eu proposals and also allows antigen tests, then the prices will fall considerably.
an antigen test at dublin airport is €49, while the cost of such a test in spain is €25.
everything you need to know about the covid-19 outbreak subscribe.
dailystay on top of the latest news with our daily newsletters each morning, lunchtime and eveningsign upinvalid email or password.
﻿
we all know that the dreaded disease of polio has been eliminated as an endemic disease in most developed and developing countries.
outbreaks have occasionally occurred in subsets of unvaccinated susceptible individuals.
according to a paper published in the us national library of medicine, infection in the intestinal tract with the vaccine strain of poliovirus results in virus shedding in the faeces and the risk that the contacts of a recipient might become infected.
the vaccine virus can revert to a virulent form, and this lends demonstrated biological plausibility to the finding that occasional contacts of vaccine recipients contract polio.
this means that all children in the vulnerable category need to be vaccinated otherwise exposure to the virus in this form that is shed through the faeces of the vaccinated children can turn the unvaccinated ones vulnerable.
are these fears applicable to the covid-19 vaccination scenario?
are the vaccinated ones capable of transferring the covid-19 disease to the unvaccinated ones?
the us centers for disease control and communicable diseases (cdc) says in a report:
how safe or vulnerable are the unvaccinated ones amidst the ones who have been already vaccinated against covid-19?
will the vaccinated ones transmit the disease asymptomatically to the vulnerable ones?
a growing body of evidence indicates that people fully vaccinated with an mrna vaccine (pfizer-biontech and moderna) are less likely to have an asymptomatic infection or to transmit sars-cov-2 to others.
studies are underway to learn more about the benefits of the johnson & johnson/janssen vaccine.
however, the risk for sars-cov-2 infection in fully vaccinated people cannot be completely eliminated as long as there is continued community transmission of the virus.
at this time, there are limited data on vaccine effectiveness in people who are immunocompromised.
people with immunocompromising conditions, including those taking immunosuppressive medications, should discuss the need for personal protective measures after vaccination with their healthcare provider.
this updated science brief synthesizes the scientific evidence supporting cdc's guidance for fully vaccinated people and will continue to be updated as more information becomes available.
the us centers for disease control and prevention changed its guidelines about mask-wearing on may 13, 2021, it declared that anyone who is fully vaccinated can participate in indoor and outdoor activities, large or small, without wearing a mask or physical distancing.
anthony fauci, the chief medical adviser to president biden, said the new guideline is "based on the evolution of the science" and "serves as an incentive" for the almost two-thirds of americans who are not yet fully vaccinated to go ahead and get the shot.
yet there remain some sections of the population who cannot be vaccinated for reasons other than vaccine hesitancy, such as:vaccines are no guarantee against infection:
though the world health organisation demands vaccine efficacy of at least 50% before granting approval, the current lot of vaccines against covid-19 has vastly outperformed expectations.
for a vaccine to be effective, it doesn't need to prevent the germ from infecting an immunized person.
vaccines train the body's immune system, so when it actually encounters the disease-causing pathogen, it's ready to mount an optimum response.
can a vaccinated person spread coronavirus?immunology experts also work on the part of enabling a vaccinated person to transmit a lesser viral load after vaccination.
but one cannot say for sure whether a vaccinated person does carry a lesser viral load by the virtue of having been vaccinated against covid-19.
this disease is new and poses a particular challenge because people with asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic infections can spread the disease – and insufficient contact tracing and testing mean those without symptoms are rarely detected.
one thing that researchers have realised though is the fact that if a previously vaccinated individual does get sick with covid-19 in what is called a "breakthrough infection," – he or she manifests symptoms that are by far milder.
people who test positive for covid-19 after getting just their first vaccine dose are found to have lower levels of virus in their bodies than unvaccinated people who tested positive.
this decreased viral load perhaps makes them less infectious as they have much fewer virus that could be spread to others.
a preprint study that has not yet been peer-reviewed suggests that the moderna mrna covid-19 vaccine can produce coronavirus-fighting antibodies in the oral and nasal fluid, reports the wire.
since the sars-cov-2 enters the human body through the respiratory tract, antibodies in the mouth and nose should block the virus from getting into the body, effectively providing "sterilizing immunity. "
would this render the vaccinated people naturally unable to spread the virus through respiratory droplets?
the jury is still out on that.
meanwhile, follow the covid-appropriate sops even if you have been vaccinated.
wear the mask when in public or in the presence of anyone who is not quarantined with you, wash hands with soap and water often, maintain appropriate social distance, use sanitiser as and when necessary.
disclaimer: tips and suggestions mentioned in the article are for general information purpose only and should not be construed as professional medical advice.
always consult your doctor or a dietician before starting any fitness programme or making any changes to your diet.
get the latest health news, healthy diet, weight loss, yoga, and fitness tips, more updates on times now
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore there are ample supplies of food and essential items but people should buy only what they need, said trade and industry minister gan kim yong.
during a virtual press conference on monday (may 31), he said singapore is working with malaysia to ensure the continued flow of essential supplies between the two countries as malaysia imposes a two-week lockdown from june 1 to june 14. mr gan, who co-chairs the multi-ministry task force on covid-19, said the government has been working with relevant agencies and companies to build up singapore's existing stockpile and further diversify its sources of food and essential items, while also increasing local production.
the economic agencies are also working with firms especially those dealing with essential goods and services to minimise disruption to their supply lines, he added.
"as the pandemic continues to evolve globally, we must remain prepared and vigilant as a nation, while staying flexible and adaptable," mr gan said.
he noted that the overall impact of phase two (heightened alert) measures on singapore's gross domestic product is expected to be modest, with the effects to differ across various sectors.
domestic consumer-oriented sectors, such as food and beverage services, retail and land transport will be hit harder, while the impact on more outward-oriented sectors such as manufacturing and finance is likely to be less severe.
last saturday, mr gan had visited supermarket chain fairprice's distribution centre in joo koon and a cold warehouse at local logistics firm ych's supply chain city to better understand the measures that have been put in place to ensure sufficient food and essential supplies for all.
he said then that singapore and malaysia have been working together closely since the start of the pandemic to ensure the flow of goods and supplies are not disrupted.
these efforts would continue following malaysia's full movement control order (mco) roll-out from june 1, he added.
singapore imports an array of products from malaysia, which include food items such as chicken and vegetables.
malaysia's total nationwide lockdown means that only essential economic sectors will be allowed to operate.
the country has seen new highs in covid-19 infections and deaths in may, despite putting in place moderate restrictions under the mco.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore there were 23 new coronavirus cases confirmed as at noon on monday (may 31), taking singapore's total to 62,051. monday's figure comprised 16 community cases, said the ministry of health (moh).
of these, three are currently unlinked.
of the 13 linked cases, 11 had already been placed under quarantine, while two were detected through surveillance, said moh.
there were also seven imported cases who had been placed on stay-home notice on arrival in singapore.
four of the imported cases are singaporeans or permanent residents.
no new cases from within workers' dormitories were reported.
more details will be announced on monday night.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore: the national environment agency (nea) is expecting an increasing number of dengue cases as singapore enters the warmer months of the year.
this is due to the accelerated breeding and maturation of the aedes aegypti mosquito and shorter incubation period of the dengue virus, the agency said on tuesday (jun 1).
the increasing population of the aedes mosquito across the island is also significant, it said.
more than 2,700 dengue cases have been reported in singapore since the start of the year.
there are currently 22 active dengue clusters.
while recent weekly dengue cases have been lower than in the same period last year, when singapore experienced a"historic" outbreak, the figures are still higher than those reported in 2017 and 2018, said nea.
the population of the aedes mosquito grew by about 30 per cent in april compared to january, said the agency.
the population remains high in areas including:- clementi west street 1;- hougang avenues 10, 6 and 8;- jurong east avenue 1 and jurong east street 32; and- mei chin road, mei ling street and stirling road.
"if left unchecked, the current high aedes aegypti mosquito population, coupled with the circulation of previously uncommon dengue virus serotypes and a sizeable proportion of people staying in and working from home, would add to the dengue risk this year," said nea.
lower immunity and "biting opportunities"nea highlighted that dengue cases caused by the less common virus serotypes denv-3 and denv-4 made up more than half the serotypes sampled since february.
"denv-3 has not been dominant since about three decades ago, and the incidence of denv-4 has been consistently low.
"thus the population immunity for denv-3 and denv-4 is low, and more people are susceptible to transmission of the virus," said the agency.
denv-3 has been detected in the dengue cluster at cashew terrace/hazel park terrace, while denv-4 has been detected in clusters at hougang central and pasir ris street 21, it said.
the agency also noted that more people are staying in and working at home during phase 2 (heightened alert) of singapore's covid-19 prevention efforts, due to last until jun 13. this could translate into more "biting opportunities" for the day-biting aedes mosquito, potentially increasing the risk of dengue transmission, it said.
the agency cited a study that found almost 50 per cent more dengue infections were reported during singapore's "circuit breaker" last year than there should have been, based on mathematical modelling.
"most of the excess infections were among adults of working age (20 to 64 years old) – people who would normally have been in workplaces, some of which would have been air-conditioned, instead of their homes," said nea.
the agency carried out the epidemiological study with the national university of singapore saw swee hock school of public health in august last year.
nea urged members of the public to remain vigilant and take steps to prevent mosquito breeding.
the agency said it continues to conduct targeted inspections at areas with higher mosquito populations and has stepped up operations at dengue clusters.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
west midlands police say they will 'leave no stone unturned' in the hunt for those responsible for this shocking crimefind your bookmarks in your independent premium section, under my profiledespite paramedics best efforts, nothing could be done to save the 14-year-old boy who died at the scene.
a teenage boy was stabbed to death near a mcdonald's in birmingham on the evening of the bank holiday monday.
the 14-year-old was attacked in kingstanding, north of the city, by up to seven people.
despite paramedics' best efforts, west midlands police said: "sadly, nothing could be done to save him," and the boy died at the scene.
a murder investigation has been launched, and west midlands police say the area where the stabbing took place has being flooded with officers to search for the offenders; officers are also speaking with witnesses and fast-tracking cctv inquiries.
detective inspector ranj sangha, of the force's homicide unit characterised the crime as "a shocking and senseless tragedy".
he said: "we will be leaving no stone unturned in our hunt for the callous individuals responsible for this, or anyone harbouring them, knowing what they have done.
"jack dromey, the area's labour mp called the attack on the teenager "truly shocking" whilst sending his condolences to the family.
he also urged anyone with information about the incident to contact the west midlands police.
anyone who can assist the investigation is asked to contact the police through the live chat on the force's website, calling 101 and quoting log 3313 of 31/5, or calling crimestoppers anonymously on 0800 555 111. join thought-provoking conversations, follow other independent readers and see their repliesdespite paramedics best efforts, nothing could be done to save the 14-year-old boy who died at the scene.
getty imageswant to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later?
start your independent premium subscription today.
log innew to the independent?want an ad-free experience?subscribe to independent premium.
singapore: a total of 2,825 singapore armed forces (saf) recruits from the 02/21 basic military training (bmt) batch graduated about a week earlier on may 26 as part of covid-19 preventive measures.
"in response to the national covid-19 situation, the singapore armed forces had earlier introduced further measures to safeguard the safety and well-being of our servicemen," the ministry of defence (mindef) said on tuesday (jun 1) in response to queries from cna.
"they (the recruits who graduated early) were also directed to strictly observe the national guidelines and only go out for essential activities while at home.
"the 02/21 batch enlisted on apr 3, apr 4 and apr 5 had completed their basic trainfire package, combat circuit and close quarter battle exercises, said the basic military training centre on its facebook page.
according to the singapore army website, the final two weeks of the nine-week bmt is when "recruits will have completed all the essential training requirements, and transformed from civilians into proud, confident soldiers".
the recruits were given the first dose of the covid-19 vaccine before going home and will get their second dose when they are posted to new units.
mindef had announced on may 18 that the saf will defer non-essential in-camp training and suspend the conduct of individual physical proficiency tests until jun 13 as part of national covid-19 measures under phase 2 (heightened alert).
however, mindef said that key activities critical for the build-up of operational units, like bmt, will continue with stringent safe management measures in place.
this includes swabbing recruits who enlist in may, as well as their trainers.
last year, the saf suspended bmt from apr 7 to may 4, in line with nationwide covid-19 measures amid a rise in community cases.
a total of 3,400 recruits were instructed to strictly observe the national guidelines of the "circuit breaker" period and were provided with home-based instructional material on basic skills and fitness development.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
jerusalem: israeli nationalist hardliner naftali bennett said on sunday (may 30) that he would join apotential coalition governmentthat could end the rule of the country's longest-serving leader, prime minister benjamin netanyahu.
lawmakers opposed to right-wing netanyahu have been in intense talks ahead of a wednesday deadline, as a ceasefire held following the latestdeadly military conflict with hamasin the gaza strip.
netanyahu, 71, who faces trial on fraud, bribery and breach of trust charges, which he denies, has clung to power throughout a period of political turmoil that has seen four inconclusive elections in under two years.
a march vote saw netanyahu's likud party gain the most seats, but he again failed to form a government.
opposition leader and former tv anchor yair lapid now has until wednesday evening to build a rival coalition.
lapid, 57, is seeking a diverse alliance which the israeli media has dubbed a bloc for "change", which would include bennett as well as arab-israeli lawmakers.
in his determination to bring down the hawkish prime minister, lapid has offered to share power and let bennett, 49, serve the first term in a rotating premiership.
bennett, after meeting members of his religious-nationalist yamina party, said on sunday: "i will do everything to form a national unity government with my friend yair lapid.
"lapid and bennett's parties started talks on sunday night to formalise the deal, they said in a statement.
religious-nationalist yamina won seven seats in mar 23 elections, but one member has refused to join an anti-netanyahu coalition.
netanyahu, who has been in office for 12 consecutive years after an earlier three-year term, in his own televised address minutes later lashed out at the plan, calling it "a danger for the security of israel".
"desperate position"he had earlier on sunday tried to cling to power by offering his own, last-ditch power-sharing agreement to several former allies including bennett.
he warned that israel would otherwise be ruled by a dangerous "left-wing" alliance.
lapid has until 11.
59 pm local time on wednesday (4.
59am on thursday, singapore time) to build a coalition of at least 61 deputies, a majority in the 120-seat knesset.
a lapid government would also include the centrist blue and white party of netanyahu's rival benny gantz and the hawkish new hope party of his former ally gideon saar.
avigdor lieberman's pro-settlement yisrael beitenu party as well as historically powerful labour and the dovish meretz party would also join.
the shaky arrangement would need the backing of some arab-israeli lawmakers of palestinian descent in order to pass a confirmation vote in parliament.
the intense talks follow weeks of escalating tensions between israel and the palestinians, including a deadly 11-day exchange of rocket fire from gaza and devastating israeli airstrikes.
the war with hamas that ended with a may 21 truce, as well as violence in the occupied west bank and in mixed jewish-arab towns in israel, initially appeared to leave netanyahu more likely to hold onto power.
but political scientist gayil talshir at hebrew university told afp on sunday that israel was now "closer than ever" to a coalition of change, adding: "netanyahu is in a desperate position.
"netanyahu's likud party won 30 seats in the march elections, but failed to form a governing coalition after his far-right partners refused to sit with arab factions or receive their support.
lapid, whose party won 17 seats, was then given four weeks to form a government.
netanyahu had previously pushed for yet another election israel's fifth in a little more than two years.
more elections?on sunday, netanyahu offered his own proposal of a rotation agreement with bennett and saar.
but saar on twitter said that he remained committed to "replacing the netanyahu regime".
netanyahu in a video then called on saar and bennett to "come now, immediately" to meet him and join a three-way rotation government, warning that they were in a "crucial moment for the security, character and future of the state of israel".
lapid's "change" coalition also still faced several obstacles.
some right-wing lawmakers object to a partnership with politicians from israel's arab minority, who make up about a fifth of the population.
the recent gaza conflict sparked inter-communal clashes between jewish and arab israelis in mixed cities.
arab politicians have also been divided about joining a government headed by bennett, who supports expanding israeli settlements in the occupied west bank, where palestinians hope to create a state.
even with support from an arab party, a new coalition in israel is unlikely to reverse years of israeli settlement construction or bring peace any time soon with hamas in gaza.
if the anti-netanyahu camp does not manage to form a government on time, a majority of 61 lawmakers could vote to ask the president to name a new premier.
another scenario would see the country return, yet again, to the polls.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
bringing you yesterday's news from japan and asia, today.
rocketnews24 japanesedecision comes days after tennis star says she would not speak with reporters during event.
last thursday, three days prior to the start of the french open, tennis star naomi osaka announced that she would be refusing to speak with the media during the tournament.
the 23-year-old declared "i'm just not going to subject myself to people that doubt me" while taking issue with athletes being "asked questions that we've been asked multiple times before or asked questions that bring doubt into our minds" and describing the way competitors are treated after a loss as "kicking a person while they're down.
"osaka said she was prepared for fines, and the tournament organizers quickly handed down a us$15,000 one, with the warning that future refusals to participate in contractually obligated media sessions would lead to larger fines and possible disqualifications.
the controversy didn't prevent her from defeating opponent patricia maria tig in straight sets on sunday, but rather than go on to the second round, osaka has opted to voluntarily withdraw from the tournament entirely.
"i think now the best thing for the tournament, the other players and my well-being is that i withdraw so that everyone can get back to focusing on the tennis going on in paris," said osaka in a statement posted through her twitter account.
"i never wanted to be a distraction and i accept that my timing was not ideal and my message could have been clearer.
"part of that clarity comes later in the statement, where osaka says that on top of being an introvert, she has struggled with depression since the 2018 us open.
as her first grand slam title, some might have assumed the tournament was a joyous occasion for osaka, but her victories over 15-year-old coco gauff and runner-up serena williams were accompanied by intense emotion from her opponents, and in interviews in the days following her win osaka's statement included " i really didn't want to think about it because it wasn't necessarily the happiest memory for me," and "of course i'm happy that i won a grand slam.
.
.
but i feel like it was so strange, i didn't just want to think about it.
.
.
i wanted to just push it to the side.
"▼ osaka's full statementpic.
twitter.
com/ln2annoayd"i wanna apologize especially to all the cool journalists who i may have hurt," osaka explains, and she goes on to say she'll be taking an indefinite hiatus from the sport with "i'm gonna take some time away from the court now.
.
.
love you guys i'll see you when i see you. "
as a player with an extremely loyal fanbase, it's likely that her osaka's supporters are happy to give her all the time she needs.
sources: twitter/@naomiosaka, bbc
top image: wikipedia/file upload bot (magnus manske)
● want to hear about soranews24's latest articles as soon as they're published?
follow us on facebook and twitter!follow soranews24© soranews24 -japan news- / socio corporation
taiwan semiconductor manufacturing co ltd (nyse: tsm), along with twenty japanese companies, have collaborated for a japanese government-initiated chip manufacturing technology development program, nikkei reports.
the japanese companies include packing technology company ibiden, materials maker asahi kasei, heat-dissipating material manufacturer shin-etsu chemical, material molder nagase & co, and manufacturing equipment producer shibaura mechatronics.
tsm plans to incur 50% of the project cost of 37 billion yen ($337 million).
the japanese government will pay the other half.
the trial facility construction will begin this summer at the national institute of advanced industrial science and technology in tsukuba, ibaraki prefecture.
the research and development work will begin in 2022. tsm plans to introduce the so-called 3d packaging technology in japan.
earlier this year, tsm planned to spend $178 million for a material research subsidiary near tokyo, reuters reports.
there is a high chance of a japanese tsm facility motive behind the government's cooperation.
price action: tsm shares traded higher by 0.
95% at $118.
45 in the premarket session on the last check tuesday.
see more from benzingaclick here for options trades from benzingaintel estimates semiconductor crisis to loom for multiple years: reutersdell, hp expect semiconductor crisis to constraint 2021 pc supply: reuters© 2021 benzinga.
com.
benzinga does not provide investment advice.
all rights reserved.
related quotestaiwan semiconductor manufacturing co.  (tsm) or tsmc will collaborate with japanese companies on a government-backed project to advance chipmaking technologies in japan.
according to nikkei asia, japan's position in the global semiconductor industry has been declining.
in a bid to improve the country's competitiveness, the government sought tsmc's help.
as a result, tsmc will set up a research and development facility in japan in partnership with the government.
it will use that facility to collaborate with more than 20 japanese companies on semiconductor technology advancements.
the participating companies will include ibiden, asahi kasei, shin-etsu chemical, shibaura mechatronics, and nagase.
tsmc will invest about $337 million in the project, which is about half of the project's cost.
the japanese government will also fund the project.
the research facility will be set up at the national institute of advanced industrial science and technology in ibaraki prefecture.
the project will begin with a trial before entering full operation in 2022.  in addition to helping advance japan's chip technology, the japanese government is also expecting tsmc to set up a manufacturing plant in the country.
tsmc is the world's largest contract chipmaker with customers including apple (aapl) and qualcomm (qcom).
(see tsmc stock analysis on tipranks) on april 15, susquehanna analyst mehdi hosseini reiterated a sell rating on tsm but raised the price target from $83 to $85, implying 27.
57% downside potential.
the analyst observed that tsmc's $100 billion capex plan would drive revenue growth for the next three years, but depreciation and higher operating expenses will weigh on earnings.
"strengthening demand environment, in our opinion, is enabling tsm to increase wafer prices across most nodes, though the sustainability of wafer price increase into 2022 and beyond is not clear," noted hosseini.
consensus among analysts on wall street is a hold based on 1 buy, 2 hold, and 1 sell ratings.
the average analyst price target of $83 implies a 29.
28% downside potential from the current price.
tsm scores a "perfect 10" on tipranks' smart score rating system, suggesting the stock is likely to outperform the market.
related news: verizon partners with aifi to enable seamless shopping at indy 500 bank of nova scotia earnings preview: here's what to expect airbnb: a category leader poised for long-term growth more recent articles from smarter analyst: encompass health to redeem $100m worth of 5.
125% senior notes bank of nova scotia earnings preview: here's what to expect hibb tops q1 estimates, raises fy22 guidance boeing shares down 1.
5% on 787 dreamliners delivery delays – reportthe stock market got off to a mixed start to the new month.
after the memorial day holiday, investors initially seemed ready to continue the bull market, but gains quickly evaporated.
by the close of trading, the dow jones industrial average (djindices: ^dji) managed to hold on to a slight advance, but the s&p 500 (snpindex: ^gspc) and nasdaq composite (nasdaqindex: ^ixic) eased lower.
all asset classes.
industry-leading prices.
user-friendly investing online.
the "race for space" sent u. k.  house prices soaring to their highest level in nearly seven years in may, as the covid-19 pandemic encouraged people to move to larger properties in rural areas.
(bloomberg) -- electric-vehicle makers and suppliers rallied on tuesday after a string of positive news for the industry, with chinese companies clocking in the biggest gains.
u. s. -traded shares of nio inc.  and xpeng inc.  surged after the two chinese ev makers reported strong sales for may and citigroup inc.  boosted its estimates for the industry.
the optimism also lifted peers workhorse group inc. , nikola corp. , lordstown motors corp.  and fisker inc. , with sne research saying global ev battery sthe us dollar initially fell during the trading session on tuesday but then turned around to form a bit of a hammer against the japanese yen in another sign of strength.
《!》ut,!j.
p.  morgan warns of more pain ahead for bitcoin prices.
here's why.
frankfurt (reuters) -euro zone inflation surged past the european central bank's elusive target in may, heightening a communications challenge for policymakers who will happily live with higher prices for now but may face a backlash from irate consumers.
inflation in the 19 countries sharing the euro accelerated to 2% in may from 1.
6% in april, driven by higher energy costs to its fastest rate since late 2018 and above the ecb's aim of "below but close to 2%", data from eurostat showed on tuesday.
sydney (reuters) -australia's big banks are likely to return a record $15 billion or more of cash to investors over the next two years, with investors betting commonwealth bank will move first and helping drive shares of the top lender to all-time highs.
commonwealth bank and its smaller rivals australia and new zealand banking group, national australia bank and westpac banking corp have made a remarkable comeback, from being shamed in a public inquiry and shunned by investors three years ago to being sought-after investments now.
the banks have come out of the covid-19 crisis relatively unscathed as australia has kept the pandemic under control and its a$2 trillion ($1.
5 trillion) economy has hummed along.
!clicklife talk,,!the exchange typically adds cryptocurrencies to its retail platform a few weeks after first listing on the professional version.
the past weekend saw the lowest number of bitcoin transfers from exchanges in 2021.
(bloomberg) -- gold headed for the first decline in three sessions as bond yields rose after a string of positive economic readings helped spur optimism in the recovery from the pandemic.
the yield on the benchmark 10-year treasury rose two basis points, hurting demand for non-interest-bearing bullion.
gold gave up gains after u. s.  manufacturing data topped estimates, fueling concern the federal reserve might have to consider tighter policy sooner than anticipated.
in may, bullion wiped out losses,!small u. s.  oilfield service companies are selling equipment and shutting their doors as business activity shrank last year and contract prices have remained below profitable levels despite oil-price gains.
the companies that provide equipment and services to the shale oil industry were among the hardest hit after the coronavirus pandemic sent oil prices reeling to record lows last year.
discounted prices offered by less powerful competitors have hurt what larger service companies can charge, said chris wright, chief executive of hydraulic fracturing company liberty oilfield services, in an interview.
(bloomberg) -- pembina pipeline corp.  agreed to acquire inter pipeline ltd.  for about c$8.
3 billion ($6.
9 billion) in an all-stock deal that will create one of the largest energy companies in canada.
the proposal from pembina trumps a hostile takeover offer for inter made by brookfield infrastructure partners lp earlier this year.
inter spurned that approach and began a review of its options, which included a sale.
the pembina-inter combination is the largest canadian energy transaction in four yehong kong (reuters) -top glove corporation's plan to list in hong kong and raise up to $1 billion has been delayed as the world's largest rubber glove maker seeks to resolve a u. s.  import ban on its products, sources with direct knowledge of the matter said.
the delay is another setback to the malaysian company from a ban on imports on its products imposed in july by the u. s.  customs and border protection (cbp) citing forced labour practices.
top glove, which is already listed in kuala lumpur and singapore, flagged in april it would sell 793.
5 million shares in the listing, half what it proposed in its application to the hong kong bourse in february.
「」kol//,/.
(bloomberg) -- sign up for the new economy daily newsletter, follow us @economics and subscribe to our podcast.
australia's central bank maintained its policy settings as it prepares to decide on extending its yield target and quantitative easing programs, with a covid-19 lockdown complicating the outlook.
the reserve bank of australia kept the cash rate and three-year yield target at 0.
10% in sydney on tuesday, as expected.
it will make a decision in july on whether to extend the yield target and undertake further quantitative easing.
a weeklong shutdown in the nation's second-largest city adds a layer of uncertainty to the outlook.
"despite the strong recovery in the economy and jobs, inflation and wage pressures are subdued," governor philip lowe said.
"the board is committed to maintaining highly supportive monetary conditions to support a return to full employment in australia and inflation consistent with the target.
"the australian dollar edged lower, trading at 77.
41 u. s.  cents at 2:53 p. m.  in sydney from 77.
62 cents just before the release.
the case for lowe to maintain the april 2024 bond as the target maturity had been strengthening amid strong hiring, sentiment and investment plans.
this was reinforced by the government keeping open the fiscal spigot in the may budget as it joins the rba in seeking to drive down unemployment to revive wages growth and inflation.
"progress in reducing unemployment has been faster than expected," lowe said in his statement.
"there are reports of labor shortages in some parts of the economy.
"risks aheadyet the rba may be encouraged to err on the side of caution if melbourne's outbreak worsens and extend both of its bond programs to keep maximum support for the economy.
"an important ongoing source of uncertainty is the possibility of significant outbreaks of the virus, although this should diminish as more of the population is vaccinated," lowe said.
"the board continues to place a high priority on a return to full employment.
"globally, central banks are beginning to edge away from emergency monetary settings.
the reserve bank of new zealand surprised markets last week in presenting projections of its official cash rate rising in the second half of next year.
back in australia, economists predicted ahead of data wednesday that gross domestic product rose 1.
5% in the first three months of the year from the prior quarter, and advanced 0.
6% from a year earlier.
treasury secretary steven kennedy, in testimony to a parliamentary panel earlier today, said partial data showed around 56,000 workers had lost their jobs in the four weeks following the end of the government's jobkeeper wage subsidy that expired march 28. he said strong employment data and forward indicators "continue to give us confidence that the labor market has the underlying strength to absorb workers transitioning off the jobkeeper payment.
"end of australia's $68 billion job-saving stimulus tests economylowe estimates australia's jobless rate will need to fall to close to 4% before driving economy-wide pay increases.
it stood at 5.
5% in april.
the governor expects wages growth will need to increase at a pace faster than 3% -- more than double the current rate -- for inflation to return sustainably to the central bank's 2-3% target.
lowe reiterated that "this is unlikely to be until 2024 at the earliest.
"(updates with further comments from governor throughout text.
)more stories like this are available on bloomberg.
comsubscribe now to stay ahead with the most trusted business news source.
©2021 bloomberg l. p. (bloomberg) -- exxon mobil corp.  is pulling out of a deep-water oil prospect in ghana just two years after the west african nation ratified an exploration and production agreement with the u. s.  oil titan.
the company relinquished the entirety of its stake in the deepwater cape three points block and resigned as its operator after fulfilling its contractual obligations during the initial exploration period, according to a letter to ghana's government seen by bloomberg and people familiar with the matter, who asked not to be named because the information isn't public.
exxon controlled 80% of the block, with state-owned ghana national petroleum corp.  holding 15% and ghana oil co. , the remaining 5%.
the two partners will now have to search for a new operator for the block, the people said.
the work done so far included processing about 2,200 square kilometers (850 square miles) of seismic data, but exxon didn't drill any exploration wells, the people said.
exxon couldn't immediately comment during the memorial day holiday in the u. s.  representatives for ghana national and ghana oil couldn't immediately be reached.
more stories like this are available on bloomberg.
comsubscribe now to stay ahead with the most trusted business news source.
©2021 bloomberg l. p. the 37.
5% decline in may is beat only by september 2011's 40%.
,,.
「」,1,3,keep~u.
s.  manufacturing activity picked up in may as pent-up demand amid a reopening economy boosted orders, but unfinished work piled up because of shortages of raw materials and labor.
the institute for supply management (ism) survey on tuesday found companies and their suppliers "continue to struggle to meet increasing levels of demand," noting that "record-long lead times, wide-scale shortages of critical basic materials, rising commodities prices and difficulties in transporting products are continuing to affect all segments" of manufacturing.
according to the ism, worker absenteeism and short-term shutdowns because of shortages of parts and workers continued to limit manufacturing's growth potential.
u. s.  construction spending increased less than expected in april as gains in private homebuilding were blunted by losses in outlays on nonresidential structures and public projects.
the commerce department said on tuesday that construction spending rose 0.
2% after surging 1.
0% in march.
economists polled by reuters had forecast construction spending gaining 0.
5%.
(bloomberg) -- the lira fell to fresh record lows against the u. s.  dollar after turkey's president recep tayyip erdogan renewed calls for lower interest rates, making a vague reference to summer months as a target date.
"i spoke with our central bank governor today.
it's an imperative that we lower interest rates.
for that, we will reach july and august thereabouts so that rates can begin to fall," the turkish leader said in an interview with state broadcaster trt late tuesday.
the lira weakened a
singapore — covid-19 vaccination guidelines in singapore have been eased for pregnant women, breastfeeding women, cancer patients currently receiving treatment, and persons who have previously suffered severe skin allergy reactions to medications.
the expert committee on covid-19 vaccination (ec19v) has been monitoring evidence and developments around the world and has revised its guidelines accordingly, the multi-ministry taskforce (mtf) on the pandemic said at a virtual press briefing on monday (31 may).
there was no evidence to suggest that the pfizer-biontech or moderna covid-19 vaccines may cause harm to pregnant women or their babies, the mtf stated.
however, the committee noted that the amount of data collected on the population segment was still much smaller compared to data on the general population.
it advised pregnant women to discuss the risks and benefits with their doctors to make an informed decision on the vaccination.
pregnant women will be able to register and book a vaccination appointment from 4 june, if they are part of the population group eligible for vaccination.
similarly, the two vaccines have been deemed to be safe for breastfeeding women and there is no need to stop breastfeeding while receiving the jabs, the ec19v said.
cancer patients on active cancer treatment remain at an increased risk of complications from covid-19 but there was no evidence of any safety signals or increased rates of adverse events from mrna-based covid-19 vaccines, noted the authorities.
director of medical services kenneth mak noted that moh had previously exercised "considerable caution" and advised that these patients complete their treatment before getting vaccinated.
"at this time, we prefer for these patients to be vaccinated in a hospital setting where they can be better monitored for their health status.
and we will review later whether these conditions can be revised.
"persons with severe cutaneous adverse reactions (scar), or sever skin allergy reactions to medications, can also receive both vaccines, even though they were previously not recommended to do so.
scar includes stevens-johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms, and drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome.
"these are very severe reactions that occur as a result of taking various types of medications," explained prof mak.
"and if you have previously had such a severe allergic reaction to medications like antibiotics, you will now be eligible to receive your covid-19 vaccination.
"the ec19v is also reviewing safety data on persons with a history of anaphylaxis, to allow more to be safely vaccinated, it added.
the committee said it intends to complete the review in the next two weeks, and will set out guidelines allowing certain persons who have had previous history of anaphylaxis to be vaccinated using mrna vaccines safely.
prof mak said, "we hope that these adjustments to our guidance will offer vaccination opportunities for more people and allow them to benefit from the enhanced immune protection that vaccination offers.
"stay in the know on-the-go: join yahoo singapore's telegram channel at http://t.
me/yahoosingaporerelated stories:possible easing of covid restrictions after 13 june if community cases fall further: lee hsien loongsingapore to make over-the-counter diy covid-19 tests available to residentscovid-19: vaccination bookings for singapore students to begin from 1 june400,000 students in singapore can register for covid vaccine from 1 june'very unlikely' to resume phase 3 straight after 13 june: lawrence wongsingapore to allow alternative covid-19 vaccines for use by private sectorhousehold members of close contact of covid-19 case to be isolated immediately: pm leehousehold contacts of quarantined persons must self-isolate at home: mohwe look at both industrial reits to suss out which makes a better buy.
the post better buy: keppel dc reit vs mapletree industrial trust appeared first on the smart investor.
all 26 hua zai eating house outlets will be closed from 1 june for two weeks and re-open on 15 june following the detection of covid-19 cases linked to an outlet at anchorvale, the ministry of health (moh) said on tuesday (1 june).
spinningfields,,, 65-6,,!malaysia scrambled jets to intercept 16 chinese military aircraft off the country's coast in the south china sea, a rare incident that the foreign minister angrily denounced tuesday as an "intrusion".
china has jailed a popular blogger for "defaming martyrs" after he suggested the death toll of the china-india border clash last year was higher than the official count of four.
missed out on the recent hdb bto may sales launch?
don't fret.
there's another hdb bto sales launch scheduled for august 2021.  if you've missed may's launch, there's also the august 2021's launch where you can expected an estimated 4,900 units across seven locations up [.
.
. ]
the post hdb bto launches in 2021 (bukit batok, tengah, kallang – whampoa, toa payoh – bidadari, woodlands, bukit merah, geylang, hougang, jurong east, queenstown, tampines) appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
!thousands of doctors across india wore black armbands on tuesday calling for the arrest of a hugely popular guru who has claimed yoga can prevent covid-19 and that conventional medicine has killed thousands of coronavirus patients.
if you've got a citibank credit card, you're in luck.
here are the deals you can enjoy as a citibank credit cardmember (on top of the credit card's own perks).
a well-known global bank, citibank offers some of the best credit cards in singapore.
it [.
.
. ]
the post citibank credit card promotions and deals: june 2021 appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
israeli politicians battling to unseat veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu have until just before midnight wednesday to make their "change" coalition, composed of bitter ideological rivals, viable.
《!》ut,!covid-19 variants are to be known by letters of the greek alphabet to avoid stigmatising nations where they were first detected, the world health organization announced monday.
the employers of an american journalist detained by myanmar authorities said monday they were yet to receive any information on his whereabouts or wellbeing, a week after he was detained.
china has relaxed its family planning policy to allow couples to have three children after a census showed its population is rapidly ageing, state media reported monday, further unwinding four decades of controls in the world's most populous nation which have strangled the birthrate.
1.
78%,.
!the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
one: full blast might've been a quick replacement for one: empower, but the martial arts spectacle delivered plenty of exciting action.
the show, which aired on friday, 28 may, featured a one super series muay thai main event between a pair of top contenders and a flyweight co-main event between rising stars.
in the evening's final .
.
.
continue reading "saemapetch kos kulabdam, xie tkos agasa at one: full blast"these renewable insurance standalones cost very little in defraying very large medical bills.
in case you are looking out for protection against infectious diseases, something that has become increasingly commonplace, you might be glad to know that many personal accident insurance plans have turned hybrid [.
.
. ]
the post best personal accident insurance plans in singapore (2021) appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
,,.
,,.
a major us-australia joint military exercise will go ahead this year despite pandemic concerns but will be significantly scaled-back, a senior australian military officer said tuesday.
china on tuesday denied an australian academic's claims that he had been tortured in custody during his two-year detention on espionage charges.
the vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap) aims to provide singaporeans with an added layer of peace of mind when they choose to be vaccinated.
the post vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap): how much will moh be insuring for serious side effects related to covid-19 vaccination?
appeared first on dollarsandsense.
sg.
!smartdon don donki,,5%,smart!the ministry of health (moh) on monday (31 may) confirmed the detection of 23 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,051. a senior australian cabinet minister on monday dropped a high-profile defamation suit against public broadcaster abc over its publication of rape allegations that helped spark nationwide protests.
the opec group of oil-producing countries and its allies agreed tuesday to maintain planned production increases, as pandemic-hit demand for crude recovers.
justin trudeau says discovery is 'painful reminder' of country's historic treatment of indigenous peoplefind your bookmarks in your independent premium section, under my profilethe remains of 215 children, some as young as 3 years old, have been found buried on a site that was once canada's largest indigenous residential school, in what prime minister justin trudeau described as a reminder of a "shameful chapter" in the country's history.
more than 150,000 first nations children were required to attend state-funded christian schools from the 19th century until the 1970s, as part of a program to assimilate them into canadian society.
the children were forced to convert to christianity, not allowed to speak their native languages, and many were beaten and verbally abused.
up to 6,000 are thought to have died.
chief rosanne casimir of the tk'emlups te secwepemc first nation said in a press release on friday that the remains were confirmed last weekend with the help of ground-penetrating radar.
ms casimir added that more bodies could still be found as the search of the kamloops indian residential school grounds in british columbia continues.
in a statement on twitter, mr trudeau said: "the news that remains were found at the former kamloops residential school breaks my heart it is a painful reminder of that dark and shameful chapter of our country's history.
"in 2008, the canadian government formally apologised in parliament and admitted that physical and sexual abuse in the schools was rampant.
indigenous leaders have cited the legacy of abuse and isolation from the schools as the root cause of epidemic rates of alcoholism and drug addiction in their communities.
a report by a truth and reconciliation commission in 2015 said at least 3,200 children had died after abuse and neglect, with reports of at least 51 deaths at the kamloops school alone between 1915 and 1963. commenting on the discovery, british columbia premier john horgan said he was "horrified and heartbroken" by the news, calling it a tragedy of "unimaginable proportions" that highlighted the violence and consequences of the residential school system.
the kamloops school operated between 1890 and 1969, when the federal government took over operations from the catholic church and operated it as a day school until it closed in 1978. ms casimir said it was thought that the deaths were undocumented, but a local museum archivist is now working with the royal british columbia museum to see if any records of the deaths can be found.
"given the size of the school, with up to 500 students registered and attending at any one time, we understand that this confirmed loss affects first nations communities across british columbia and beyond," she said in an earlier press release shared late on thursday.
she added that officials were working to inform community members and surrounding communities that had children who attended the school.
additional reporting by apjoin thought-provoking conversations, follow other independent readers and see their repliesmore than 200 pairs of children's shoes have been placed on the steps of the vancouver art gallery to pay tribute to those buried at the school siteapwant to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later?
start your independent premium subscription today.
log innew to the independent?want an ad-free experience?subscribe to independent premium.
singapore: a civil engineering company has been fined s$41,500 for damaging a potable water main, which caused 1.
8 million litres of water to be lost, said pub on tuesday (jun 1).
tong shing contractors was also penalised for carrying out works within a water pipe corridor without pub's prior approval, said the national water agency in a press release.
this is the company's first conviction and the fine was meted out on may 18. the contractor was carrying out pipe jacking works across admiralty road west on dec 22, 2018 as part of road-widening and infrastructure works.
according to pub, the head of the pipe-jacking machine struck a water main with a diameter of 700mm at a depth of about 3.
7m below the road surface and punctured it.
"the leak resulted in the loss of 1.
8 million litres of potable water, enough to fill about two-thirds of an olympic-sized swimming pool," said the agency.
"as a result of the incident, three traffic lanes at admiralty road west near the junction of dahan road were also affected.
"after being alerted to the incident, the agency isolated the leak and carried out repair works, "which uncovered a hole of about 300mm on the water main".
"investigations revealed that tong shing did not carry out adequate site verification works to physically ascertain the exact location and alignment of the affected water main before commencement of works," pub added.
tong shing also proceeded with pipe jacking works without submitting a plan for pub's approval as required and "failed to take all reasonable precautions to minimise the risk of damage", the agency said.
pub said it takes "a serious view" of water main damage resulting in wastage, which can be prevented with "due diligence".
"contractors should always refer to pub's advisory on the prevention of damage to water pipe infrastructure before carrying out any construction works.
they must exercise caution when carrying out works near water mains and ensure that adequate measures are in place to prevent damage.
"under the public utilities act, the penalty for damaging a water main or connecting pipe with a diameter of 300mm or more is a fine of up to s$200,000, up to three years in jail or both.
contractors who carry out works in the vicinity of water mains without an approved plan may be fined up to s$10,000.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore following news of a covid-19 cluster with five new cases on sunday (may 30) at the ntuc foodfare at block 308 anchorvale road, there was a queue for testing at the clinic next to the foodcourt.
dozens of people some with children in tow waited outside healthway medical clinic to be swabbed on monday.
one of them, consultant david chan, said he had visited a roasted meats stall at the foodcourt last thursday.
although mr chan did not receive an alert from the authorities urging him to get tested, he decided to do so after a relative informed him about the cluster.
"although i am fully vaccinated, i have to be responsible for myself and my family," said the 58-year-old.
an engineer, who wished to be known only as mr bon, said he had visited the foodcourt last saturday to get dim sum.
the 31-year-old, who lives nearby, said he found out about the cluster after a friend informed him.
he had not received an exposure alert on his tracetogether app, but decided to undergo the swab test.
he said: "we are just doing our part for the community.
it is better to be safe than sorry.
"the ministry of health reported on sunday that five of the day's 19 community cases were linked to a new cluster at the foodcourt.
with links to two earlier cases, the cluster has a total of seven cases.
some of these cases were linked to staff working at the hua zai hk style roasted delight rice noodle at fu fa food court at 21 hougang street 51. when the straits times visited the fu fa food court on monday morning, its shutters were down.
the area outside was also cordoned off.
the fu fa food court in hougang was closed, after several covid-19 cases were linked to staff at a stall there.
st photo: yeo shu hui
an advertisement pasted outside the foodcourt invited job applications to be cleaners at the foodcourt.
when a phone number listed on the advertisement was called, the woman who answered said she worked at the drinks stall at the foodcourt.
she said the foodcourt would be closed for two weeks.
the anchorvale foodcourt is also closed till june 13.  st has contacted ntuc foodfare for a comment.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
negombo, sri lanka (afp) sri lanka's criminal investigators began questioning the crew of a burning cargo ship on monday (may 31), as the singapore-registered carrier smouldered for a 12th straight day in one of the island's worst marine ecological disasters.
a fire broke out aboard the mv x-press pearl, which was carrying 25 tonnes of nitric acid and a huge amount of plastic raw materials as it was about to enter colombo harbour on may 20. the intense flames, still burning at the rear of the 186m vessel, have destroyed much of the cargo, some of which has fallen into the indian ocean.
tonnes of microplastic granules from the ship and its nearly 1,500 containers have inundated sri lanka's famed beaches, forcing a fishing ban and sparking fears of ecological devastation.
marine environment protection authority (mepa) chief dharshani lahandapura said they were still assessing the ecological damage, but believed it was the "worst ever in my lifetime".
the police inspector-general has ordered the criminal investigation department to investigate the fire as well as the huge environmental damage caused, an official said.
"the 25-member crew have completed their quarantine and we are able to question them today," a police spokesman said.
detectives interviewed the vessel's skipper and chief engineer – both russians – and its chief officer, an indian, at a hotel where they have been quarantined, police said.
mepa said the captain of the vessel had known about a nitric acid leak on may 11, long before the vessel entered sri lankan waters.
"we have questioned three members of the crew so far and the investigations are ongoing," a police spokesman added.
"select seafarers have today been helping local police with their enquiries into the fire and are cooperating with investigators," the vessel's operators, x-press feeders, added in a statement.
"we will respect this process and not publicly discuss operational details until the investigation has been completed. "
the intense flames destroyed much of the cargo, some of which fell into the indian ocean.
the authorities are moving to sue the owners of the vessel and its crew and claim damages from insurers.
the fire has been under control since sunday, officials said, adding, however, that the vessel continued to smoke on monday and that high monsoon winds were fanning flames at the back of the ship.
they said it was still too hot for them to attempt boarding the stricken ship.
international salvage firm smit is leading efforts to douse the flames and is being assisted by sri lanka's navy and the indian coast guard.
the three-month-old ship was heading to colombo from gujarat, india.
it had previously visited qatar and dubai and was due to go to malaysia and singapore after calling at colombo.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
keep up to speed at a glance with the top 10 daily storiesthe discovery of the remains of 215 children at one of several boarding schools set up a century ago to forcibly assimilate canada's indigenous peoples has once again compelled the nation to confront its painful past.
the grim find at the kamloops indian residential school in western british columbia province offered a stark reminder of the widespread discrimination experienced by the country's indigenous people -- and the particular tragedy of the schools.
in 2015, a truth and reconciliation commission (trc) report said canada's assimilation policy pursued until the latter half of the 20th century -- including atrocities at the schools -- amounted to "cultural genocide.
"that led to a renewed push to atone for canada's past behavior, and prime minister justin trudeau has made reconciliation with the country's 600 tribes a priority for his government, but not everyone is convinced progress is imminent.
"for many first nations, metis or inuit communities in canada, several generations of their families attended the schools and the trauma affiliated with (them) is still very present," tricia logan, head of the residential school history and dialogue centre at the university of british columbia, told afp.
"it's hard to say if canada is willing or able to face the truth," logan said, noting that some people still "deny that what happened at the schools was negligent or abusive.
"about 150,000 indian, inuit and metis youngsters in total were enrolled in these schools.
at least 4,100 died, according to the trc report.
"we all have a role to play in dismantling systemic inequalities and discrimination -- it starts with acknowledging the truth about these past wrongs," trudeau said tuesday.
'devastating' -in 2008, the government in ottawa issued a formal apology as part of a can$1.
9 billion (us$1.
5 billion) settlement with former students at the residential schools, which were run by the government and the catholic church.
then in 2015, the trc report called for major changes to school curricula, among its 94 recommendations, to highlight the history and lingering impacts of the residential schools program.
logan said the public response to that report was mostly "empathetic and supportive," but some remarks were also "very racist or harmful.
"few spoke out about their experiences at the 139 schools until the last one closed in saskatchewan province in 1996. the tk'emlups te secwepemc tribe said last week it had used ground-penetrating radar to confirm the remains of the 215 students who attended the kamloops indian residential school -- far more than the 50 deaths officially on record.
it was the largest of canada's boarding schools for indigenous youth, with up to 500 students attending at any one time.
attendance was compulsory, and generations of children were separated from their families, logan said.
after decades under church administration, the government took it over, finally closing its doors in 1978. the discovery of the unmarked graves in kamloops has for many former students been "devastating," logan said.
"i do not think the news came as a surprise to survivors and their families, but learning new truths about the schools compounds existing trauma that (they) carry all the time," she explained.
it also "reminds survivors about their time and the considerable losses they experienced at the schools," she said.
abuse, disease, malnutrition -logan, who is credited with decades of research on the residential schools, said they had "notoriously high rates of physical and sexual abuse, disease, malnutrition and neglect that all contributed to high death rates.
"underfunded and under-equipped, they became breeding grounds for tuberculosis, influenza and pneumonia.
former students told of being served scraps and culturally unsuitable foods, brutal punishments meted out by teachers, rapes and sexual violence, and other abuses.
they were also prohibited from speaking their native languages or practicing their customs, effectively "killing the indian in them," according to the trc report.
today, those experiences are blamed for a high incidence of poverty, alcoholism and domestic violence, as well as high suicide rates, in canada's indigenous communities.
the trc noted that parents' requests to have their sons or daughters' remains returned home were rejected at the time by the government as too costly.
now, most of the school cemeteries where they are interred have been abandoned.
'much more to do' -after the kamloops revelation, more excavations of school burial sites are now being planned across canada.
trudeau has promised "concrete actions.
"for logan, "the work is enormous and there is much more to do.
"the federation of sovereign indian nations, which represents 74 first nations in saskatchewan, said the undocumented deaths of students must be exposed for "closure to begin healing.
""these children deserve the respect and dignity of proper burials.
.
.
to ensure that their souls are at peace," the group said in a statement.
str-amc/sstmalaysia scrambled jets to intercept 16 chinese military aircraft off the country's coast in the south china sea, a rare incident that the foreign minister angrily denounced tuesday as an "intrusion".
thousands of doctors across india wore black armbands on tuesday calling for the arrest of a hugely popular guru who has claimed yoga can prevent covid-19 and that conventional medicine has killed thousands of coronavirus patients.
spinningfields,,, 65-6,,!missed out on the recent hdb bto may sales launch?
don't fret.
there's another hdb bto sales launch scheduled for august 2021.  if you've missed may's launch, there's also the august 2021's launch where you can expected an estimated 4,900 units across seven locations up [.
.
. ]
the post hdb bto launches in 2021 (bukit batok, tengah, kallang – whampoa, toa payoh – bidadari, woodlands, bukit merah, geylang, hougang, jurong east, queenstown, tampines) appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
if you've got a citibank credit card, you're in luck.
here are the deals you can enjoy as a citibank credit cardmember (on top of the credit card's own perks).
a well-known global bank, citibank offers some of the best credit cards in singapore.
it [.
.
. ]
the post citibank credit card promotions and deals: june 2021 appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
covid-19 variants are to be known by letters of the greek alphabet to avoid stigmatising nations where they were first detected, the world health organization announced monday.
,hk$1,000!
!israeli politicians battling to unseat veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu have until just before midnight wednesday to make their "change" coalition, composed of bitter ideological rivals, viable.
the employers of an american journalist detained by myanmar authorities said monday they were yet to receive any information on his whereabouts or wellbeing, a week after he was detained.
china has relaxed its family planning policy to allow couples to have three children after a census showed its population is rapidly ageing, state media reported monday, further unwinding four decades of controls in the world's most populous nation which have strangled the birthrate.
《!》ut,!the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
one: full blast might've been a quick replacement for one: empower, but the martial arts spectacle delivered plenty of exciting action.
the show, which aired on friday, 28 may, featured a one super series muay thai main event between a pair of top contenders and a flyweight co-main event between rising stars.
in the evening's final .
.
.
continue reading "saemapetch kos kulabdam, xie tkos agasa at one: full blast"we look at both industrial reits to suss out which makes a better buy.
the post better buy: keppel dc reit vs mapletree industrial trust appeared first on the smart investor.
,,.
,,.
these renewable insurance standalones cost very little in defraying very large medical bills.
in case you are looking out for protection against infectious diseases, something that has become increasingly commonplace, you might be glad to know that many personal accident insurance plans have turned hybrid [.
.
. ]
the post best personal accident insurance plans in singapore (2021) appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
china has jailed a popular blogger for "defaming martyrs" after he suggested the death toll of the china-india border clash last year was higher than the official count of four.
all 26 hua zai eating house outlets will be closed from 1 june for two weeks and re-open on 15 june following the detection of covid-19 cases linked to an outlet at anchorvale, the ministry of health (moh) said on tuesday (1 june).
!smartdon don donki,,5%,smart!a major us-australia joint military exercise will go ahead this year despite pandemic concerns but will be significantly scaled-back, a senior australian military officer said tuesday.
the vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap) aims to provide singaporeans with an added layer of peace of mind when they choose to be vaccinated.
the post vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap): how much will moh be insuring for serious side effects related to covid-19 vaccination?
appeared first on dollarsandsense.
sg.
a senior australian cabinet minister on monday dropped a high-profile defamation suit against public broadcaster abc over its publication of rape allegations that helped spark nationwide protests.
all asset classes.
industry-leading prices.
user-friendly investing online.
china on tuesday denied an australian academic's claims that he had been tortured in custody during his two-year detention on espionage charges.
dozens of leading hong kong democracy activists could face up to life in prison for organising an unofficial primary election, prosecutors confirmed monday, in the most sweeping use yet of beijing's strict new security law.
the ministry of health (moh) on monday (31 may) confirmed the detection of 23 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,051.
bangkok: two ancient sandstone artefacts believed to have been stolen from thailand during the vietnam war were unveiled on monday (may 31) at a bangkok museum, greeted with a fanfare of traditional dancers and an elaborate worship ceremony.
the temple support beams which were returned on friday boast exquisite carvings of the hindu deities indra and yama that date back to the late 10th or 11th century.
they had been on display for decades at the san francisco asian art museum, and their repatriation to thailand followed a yearslong investigation by the us department of homeland security.
on monday, museum staff carefully unpacked the artefacts under the watchful gaze of culture minister itthiphol khunpluem as thai traditional music played.
"these two lintels are evidence of our rich and prosperous history dating back many centuries ago," he said, thanking us authorities and the thai foreign affairs ministry for the "relentless pursuit of the sandstones".
itthiphol also said the government is still deliberating whether they would be taken to smaller, local museums in the provinces of buriram and sa kaeo, which border neighbouring cambodia.
the lintels have features that mirror famed cambodian temples showing the influence and reach of the ancient khmer kingdom and are believed to have been stolen out of thailand between 1958 and 1969. as music blared, thai traditional dancers in gold-flecked dresses donning plastic face shields performed during the unveiling ceremony for the artefacts.
massive towers of fruit were also on display around flower wreaths an offering to the gods to protect the lintels.
itthiphol said there are still "13 more buddha statues and engraved artefacts waiting to be repatriated from the us".
the california museum had disputed investigators' allegations that the artefacts were stolen, and insisted it had long planned to return them.
us museums are not the only ones to be embroiled in art provenance scandals in recent years.
australia has repatriated at least eight looted statues to india since 2014. france has vowed to return items taken from senegal and benin, while the netherlands is moving to repatriate artefacts stolen from its former colonies.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore: malaysia's narcotics criminal investigation department (ncid) has busted a drug syndicate that smuggled drugs into singapore using modified fire extinguishers.
in a statement on tuesday (jun 1), the central narcotics bureau (cnb) said the operation was a result of intelligence information sharing between the bureau, malaysia's ncid and the johor police, citing johor police chief ayob khan mydin pitchay.
"motivated by profit, drug traffickers and syndicates will continue to take huge gambles to smuggle illicit drugs into singapore, and will stop at nothing to evade detection from the authorities," said cnb.
"the recent arrests in both malaysia and singapore are a testament to the close cooperation between the drug enforcement agencies in both countries.
"cnb said it would continue to work closely with malaysia's ncid to share timely intelligence and to secure singapore's borders against transnational drug trafficking activities.
on may 18, the cnb arrested seven people, aged 26 to 48, for suspected drug offences.
it also seized various drugs with a street value of close to s$850,000.
about 466g of heroin, which wasconcealed inside a fire extinguisher, was seized from a residential unit near jurong east ave 1. it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore — the ministry of health (moh) on monday (31 may) confirmed 23 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,051. there are 16 new cases of locally transmitted covid-19 infection, said moh in a news release.
thirteen of these cases are linked to previous cases, out of whom 11 have already been placed on quarantine and two were detected through surveillance.
the remaining three local cases are unlinked.
all the new local cases are in the community, with no new cases detected in the migrant worker dormitories, said moh.
there are also seven imported cases, including four returning singaporeans or permanent residents.
all the imported cases have been placed on stay-home notice since their arrival in the country.
overall, the number of new cases in the community has decreased from 185 cases in the week before to 128 cases in the past week.
the number of unlinked cases in the community has also decreased from 32 cases in the week before to 26 cases in the past week.
in a national televised address on monday, prime minister lee hsien loong said the government should be able to ease covid-19 safe management restrictions after 13 june if the pandemic situation continues to improve and the number of community cases falls further.
the three unlinked cases are:a 72-year-old singaporean woman who is a homemakera 68-year-old singaporean man who works as a manager at phoenix entertainment karaoke tv music loungea 60-year-old singaporean woman who works in an administrative role at white sands primary schoolthere is one new active covid-19 cluster as of monday, bringing the total number of such clusters in singapore to 40. the new cluster is named after case 63844, a 49-year-old singaporean woman who works as executive at eng soon chair & table hire service.
she was confirmed to have covid-19 infection on 28 may.
the two latest cases in the cluster are an 82-year-old singaporean woman who is retired and a 54-year-old singaporean man who works as a senior executive at eng soon chair & table hire service.
the remaining linked cases are from the ntuc foodfare (308 anchorvale road), hong ye group cleaners, case 63660, case 63708, and case 63714 clusters, and one case who is not categorised under any cluster.
the two new cases in the cluster are a 33-year-old male singapore permanent resident who works as a supervisor at hua zai hk style roasted delight rice noodle (308 anchorvale road) and a 33-year-old male malaysia national who works as a kitchen assistant at hua zai hk style roasted delights (308 achorvale road and 476d upper serangoon view).
the four new cases in the cluster are:an 18-year-old singaporean man who is employed by hong ye group as a cleaner at changi business parkan 18-year-old singaporean man who is a full-time national serviceman at the civil defence academya 16-year-old singaporean boy who is currently unemployedan 11-year-old singaporean boy who is a student at new town primary school and was last in school on 18 maythe sole new case in the cluster is a 33-year-old singaporean woman who works as a manager at changi airport group and has been working from home.
the two new cases in the cluster are a 45-year-old singaporean woman who is a homemaker and a 9-year-old singaporean girl who is a student at chua chu kang primary school, and was last in school on 18 may.
the sole new case in the cluster is a 56-year-old singaporean woman who is a homemaker.
the remaining linked case is a 30-year-old male malaysia national who works as an administrative staff at sin wei precision mechanical.
the seven imported cases are:• one is a singaporean and three are singapore permanent residents who returned from india, indonesia, malaysia and the philippines• three are work permit holders who arrived from indonesia and myanmar, of whom one is a foreign domestic workerwith 25 more patients discharged from hospitals or community isolation facilities on monday, 61,459 cases – or 99 per cent of the total – have fully recovered from the infection.
most of the 223 hospitalised cases are stable or improving, while two of them are in critical condition in the intensive care unit.
a total of 336 patients – with mild symptoms or are clinically well but still test positive – are isolated and cared for at community facilities.
apart from the 33 patients who have died from covid-19 complications, 15 others who tested positive for the virus were determined to have died from unrelated causes, including three whose deaths were attributed to a heart attack and another four, whose deaths were attributed to coronary heart disease.
among the 191 confirmed cases reported from 25 to 31 may, 45 cases have tested positive for their serology tests, 110 have tested negative, and 36 serology test results are pending.
stay in the know on-the-go: join yahoo singapore's telegram channel at http://t.
me/yahoosingaporerelated stories:possible easing of covid restrictions after 13 june if community cases fall further: lee hsien loongsingapore to make over-the-counter diy covid-19 tests available to residentscovid-19: vaccination bookings for singapore students to begin from 1 june400,000 students in singapore can register for covid vaccine from 1 june'very unlikely' to resume phase 3 straight after 13 june: lawrence wongsingapore to allow alternative covid-19 vaccines for use by private sectorhousehold members of close contact of covid-19 case to be isolated immediately: pm leecovid vaccination guidelines eased for pregnant, breastfeeding women, cancer patientshousehold contacts of quarantined persons must self-isolate at home: mohwe look at both industrial reits to suss out which makes a better buy.
the post better buy: keppel dc reit vs mapletree industrial trust appeared first on the smart investor.
all 26 hua zai eating house outlets will be closed from 1 june for two weeks and re-open on 15 june following the detection of covid-19 cases linked to an outlet at anchorvale, the ministry of health (moh) said on tuesday (1 june).
spinningfields,,, 65-6,,!malaysia scrambled jets to intercept 16 chinese military aircraft off the country's coast in the south china sea, a rare incident that the foreign minister angrily denounced tuesday as an "intrusion".
china has jailed a popular blogger for "defaming martyrs" after he suggested the death toll of the china-india border clash last year was higher than the official count of four.
missed out on the recent hdb bto may sales launch?
don't fret.
there's another hdb bto sales launch scheduled for august 2021.  if you've missed may's launch, there's also the august 2021's launch where you can expected an estimated 4,900 units across seven locations up [.
.
. ]
the post hdb bto launches in 2021 (bukit batok, tengah, kallang – whampoa, toa payoh – bidadari, woodlands, bukit merah, geylang, hougang, jurong east, queenstown, tampines) appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
!thousands of doctors across india wore black armbands on tuesday calling for the arrest of a hugely popular guru who has claimed yoga can prevent covid-19 and that conventional medicine has killed thousands of coronavirus patients.
if you've got a citibank credit card, you're in luck.
here are the deals you can enjoy as a citibank credit cardmember (on top of the credit card's own perks).
a well-known global bank, citibank offers some of the best credit cards in singapore.
it [.
.
. ]
the post citibank credit card promotions and deals: june 2021 appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
israeli politicians battling to unseat veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu have until just before midnight wednesday to make their "change" coalition, composed of bitter ideological rivals, viable.
,hk$1,000!
!covid-19 variants are to be known by letters of the greek alphabet to avoid stigmatising nations where they were first detected, the world health organization announced monday.
the employers of an american journalist detained by myanmar authorities said monday they were yet to receive any information on his whereabouts or wellbeing, a week after he was detained.
china has relaxed its family planning policy to allow couples to have three children after a census showed its population is rapidly ageing, state media reported monday, further unwinding four decades of controls in the world's most populous nation which have strangled the birthrate.
,,.
,,.
the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
one: full blast might've been a quick replacement for one: empower, but the martial arts spectacle delivered plenty of exciting action.
the show, which aired on friday, 28 may, featured a one super series muay thai main event between a pair of top contenders and a flyweight co-main event between rising stars.
in the evening's final .
.
.
continue reading "saemapetch kos kulabdam, xie tkos agasa at one: full blast"these renewable insurance standalones cost very little in defraying very large medical bills.
in case you are looking out for protection against infectious diseases, something that has become increasingly commonplace, you might be glad to know that many personal accident insurance plans have turned hybrid [.
.
. ]
the post best personal accident insurance plans in singapore (2021) appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
《!》ut,!a major us-australia joint military exercise will go ahead this year despite pandemic concerns but will be significantly scaled-back, a senior australian military officer said tuesday.
china on tuesday denied an australian academic's claims that he had been tortured in custody during his two-year detention on espionage charges.
the vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap) aims to provide singaporeans with an added layer of peace of mind when they choose to be vaccinated.
the post vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap): how much will moh be insuring for serious side effects related to covid-19 vaccination?
appeared first on dollarsandsense.
sg.
!smartdon don donki,,5%,smart!a senior australian cabinet minister on monday dropped a high-profile defamation suit against public broadcaster abc over its publication of rape allegations that helped spark nationwide protests.
the opec group of oil-producing countries and its allies agreed tuesday to maintain planned production increases, as pandemic-hit demand for crude recovers.
lawrence wong: singapore will not revert to phase 3 when phase 2 (heightened alert) ends despite community spread of covid-19 shown sign under control.
singapore: airlines will be responsible for ensuring that returning singapore citizens and permanent residents (prs) have a valid negative covid-19 test, said the civil aviation authority of singapore (caas).
all airlines flying into changi airport have been informed of the new requirement, said caas airport operations regulation and aviation security director margaret tan, responding to queries from cna.
airlines must check that all passengers including returning singapore citizens and prs have a valid negative polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test result certificate before allowing them to board a flight to singapore, said ms tan.
these certificates should be issued by an internationally accredited or recognised laboratory, clinic or medical facility specified by singapore's ministry of health, she added.
"airlines must not allow a passenger to board the flight to singapore if that passenger fails to produce the result of the required pcr test or if the result of that pcr test is positive.
they will be responsible to carry a person who is denied entry into singapore back to the point of departure," she said.
this comes after the ministry of health announcedlast week that singaporeans and prs are now required to present a valid negative covid-19 pcr test taken within 72 hours before departing for singapore.
excluded are those who have stayed in lower-risk countries and regions comprising australia, brunei, mainland china, new zealand, hong kong and macau in the last 21 days before departure to singapore.
previously only long-term pass holders and short-term pass visitors entering singapore were required to present a valid negative covid-19 pcr test.
those who arrive in singapore without a valid negative test result may be denied entry, moh said, adding that prs and long-term pass holders who fail to comply may also have their permit or pass cancelled.
according to the immigration and checkpoints authority's (ica) safetravel website, those travelling by plane or by boat will have to present their test result at the air and sea checkpoints upon arrival in singapore.
singapore airlines (sia) said passengers will be required to show its service agents a valid negative covid-19 pcr test certificate.
"this test must have been taken within 72 hours of their first point of embarkation," said a spokesperson for the national carrier.
"passengers who are unable to produce a valid certificate will not be permitted to board the flight.
"however, those who are unable to get covid-19 tests in time will be allowed to book another flight on sia without incurring further penalties.
"complimentary rebooking is available for passengers who are unable to meet the requirements in time, subject to seat availability," said the sia spokesperson.
could a singapore citizen be barred from entry?while the onus is on people to ensure they have the necessary negative test and airlines to make sure no-one boards a flight to singapore without one, it is unclear what would happen if a citizen arrived without that necessary documentation.
in response to questions on this issue, ica directed cna to a page on its website on requirements for citizens and prs travelling to singapore, which highlights the need for the negative test.
however, singapore management university associate professor of law eugene tan said that if a citizen did arrive at a singapore immigration without the requisite negative test, there may be no legal basis for ica to deny the citizen entry so long as the person has valid travel documents.
if a singapore citizen were to be rejected entry into the country on the basis of not possessing a negative covid-19 test, a "legitimate argument" could be made that the individual's rights under article 13(1) of the singapore constitution which states that no singapore citizen shall be "banished or excluded" from the country had been breached, said assoc prof tan.
he noted that it is more likely that a singaporean without the requisite negative covid-19 test would not be able to board the aircraft or sea vessel in the first place.
"therefore, the situation of the citizen being excluded from singapore does not arise in such a situation," he said.
assoc prof tan believes it is a "moot legal question" as to whether a pre-departure covid-19 test is "so unreasonable or unlawful such that it effectively restricts and derogates" from a citizen's constitutional right.
"in my view, no, given the global pandemic and the need to protect passengers travelling to singapore and the public health imperative to keep people in singapore safe," he said.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
loading.
.
.
tuesday, 01 jun 2021 03:45 pm mytby sylvia looi

this year's tokyo olympics will see over 150,000 condoms being given away to athletes as souvenirs.
― picture by yusof mat isa

follow us on instagram and subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates.
kuala lumpur, june 1 ― this year's tokyo olympics will see more than 150,000 condoms given out to athletes as souvenirs of their time in japan.
however, the organiser is not encouraging the athletes to use it at the games village but to bring it back to their own countries.
quoting the games organiser, tokyo-based news site soranews24 reported that they wanted to raise awareness about sexually-transmitted diseases.
in other words, the olympic condoms are meant to be souvenirs from the competitors' time in japan, which they will enjoy using once they are back home.
the organising committee is said to be examining the specific distribution process, implying that perhaps they won't be given out until after the games are done and athletes are leaving the village.
it has been a tradition since the 1988 seoul olympics that athletes staying in the olympic village be provided with condoms.
the tokyo olympics is scheduled to start on july 23 with no spectators from overseas at its venues due to the covid-19 pandemic.
loading.
.
.
© 2021, malay mail, all rights reserved.
pope francis on tuesday issued the most extensive revision to catholic church law in four decades.
photograph: filippo monteforte/ap pope francis on tuesday issued the most extensive revision to catholic church law in four decades, insisting that bishops take action against clerics who abuse minors and vulnerable adults, commit fraud or attempt to ordain women.
the revision, which has been in the works since 2009, involves all of section six of the church's code of canon law, a seven-book code of about 1,750 articles.
it replaced the code approved by pope john paul ii in 1983 and will take effect on december 8th.
the revised section, involving about 90 articles concerning crime and punishment, incorporates many existing changes made to church law by francis and his predecessor benedict xvi.
it introduces new categories and clearer, more specific language in an attempt to give bishops less wiggle room.
in a separate accompanying document, the pope reminded bishops that they were responsible for following the letter of the law.
one aim of the revisions, francis said, was to "reduce the number of cases in which the imposition of a penalty was left to the discretion of authorities".
archbishop filippo iannone, head of the vatican department that oversaw the project, said there had been "a climate of excessive slack in the interpretation of penal law", where some bishops sometimes put mercy before justice.
sexual abuse of minors was put under a new section titled "offences against human life, dignity and liberty", compared to the previously vague "crimes against special obligations".
the new section was expanded to include crimes such as "grooming" of minors or vulnerable adults for sexual abuse and possessing child pornography.
it includes the possible defrocking of clerics who use "threats or abuse of his authority", to force someone to have sexual relations.
last year, an internal report found that former cardinal theodore mccarrick had abused his authority to force seminarians to sleep with him.
he was defrocked in 2019 on charges of the sexual abuse of minors and adults.
according to the new code, lay persons in positions of responsibility in the church and found guilty of sexual abuse of minors or vulnerable adults can be punished by the church as well as by civil authorities.
while the church has historically prohibited the ordination of women and the ban has been reaffirmed by popes, the 1983 code says only in another section that priestly ordination was reserved for "a baptised male".
the revised code specifically warns that both the person who attempts to confer ordination on a woman and the woman herself incur automatic excommunication and that the cleric risks being defrocked.
kate mcelwee, executive director of the women's ordination conference, said in a statement that while the position was not surprising, spelling it out in the new code was "a painful reminder of the vatican's patriarchal machinery and its far-reaching attempts to subordinate women".
reflecting the series of financial scandals that have hit the church in recent decades, other new entries in the code include several on economic crimes, such as embezzlement of church funds or property or grave negligence in their administration.
– reuters subscribe.
week beginning saturday december 26th, 2020

week beginning saturday, december 5th, 2020

week beginning saturday, september 5th, 2020
invalid email or password.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
after the announcement on sunday of a covid-19 cluster with five new cases at the ntuc foodfare at block 308 anchorvale road, residents queued to get tested at a clinic next to the foodcourt yesterday.
dozens of people some with children in tow were seen waiting outside healthway medical clinic to take a covid-19 swab test.
one of them, consultant david chan, had visited a roasted meat stall at the foodcourt last thursday.
although the 58-year-old did not receive an alert from the authorities urging him to get tested, he decided to do so after a relative informed him about the cluster.
"although i am fully vaccinated, i have to be responsible for myself and my family," he said.
an engineer, who wished to be known only as mr bon, visited the foodcourt last saturday to buy dim sum.
the 31-year-old, who lives nearby, said he knew about the cluster after a friend informed him.
he also had not received an exposure alert on his tracetogether app, but decided to go for a swab test.
he said: "we are just doing our part for the community.
it is better to be safe than sorry.
"on sunday, the ministry of health said that five of the 19 new community cases reported that day were linked to a new cluster at the foodcourt.
the cluster, which has links to two earlier cases, has nine cases.
some of these cases were linked to staff working at the hua zai hk style roasted delight rice noodle stall at fu fa food court at 21 hougang street 51. when the straits times visited the fu fa food court yesterday morning, its shutters were down.
the area outside was also cordoned off.
an advertisement pasted on a wall outside invited applications to be cleaners at the foodcourt.
when the straits times called the phone number listed on the advertisement, a woman who answered the call said she works at a drinks stall at the foodcourt.
she said the place would be closed for two weeks.
the anchorvale foodcourt is also closed till june 13.  the straits times has contacted ntuc foodfare for a comment.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore should be able to relax tightened restrictions on social gatherings after june 13 if the covid-19 situation continues to improve and there are fewer community cases, said prime minister lee hsien loong yesterday.
but the country is unlikely to return to phase three of its reopening immediately.
finance minister lawrence wong said any relaxation of measures will have to be done gradually in a "controlled and calibrated manner".
addressing the nation in a live broadcast, pm lee pointed out that the number of new cases reported daily has dropped since the country went on heightened alert to combat the virus' spread.
singapore should be on track to bring the outbreak under control, barring another super-spreader event or big cluster, he said.
"we will know for sure in another week or so.
meanwhile, i count on everyone to keep up our efforts and stay vigilant," pm lee added.
this means working from home if possible and going out only when necessary, as well as seeing a doctor immediately if unwell even if one has been vaccinated.
on may 16, the country tightened covid-19 restrictions to stamp out a worrying surge of cases in the community.
these included capping group sizes for social gatherings to two people down from eight in phase three and prohibiting dining in at all eateries.
the measures, implemented after new clusters were detected at places such as tan tock seng hospital and changi airport, are slated to end on june 13. the multi-ministry task force tackling the pandemic, which mr wong co-chairs, has assessed that the current suite of measures put in place since may 16 are adequate, said the ministry of health.
health minister ong ye kung, who is also co-chair of the task force, noted that there were 182 covid-19 community cases from may 17 to may 23. this dipped to 136 cases from may 24 to may 30. breaking down the numbers, he said the number of unlinked cases as a proportion of all cases has fallen from 22 per cent in the first week of stricter measures, to 18 per cent in the second week.
"the more we can shift this number away to linked cases or better still, linked and quarantined cases the lesser will be the spread of the disease, and the more we can bring the overall number down and suppress this wave of transmission," mr ong said at a press conference after pm lee's speech.
one positive sign is that nearly 70 per cent of new cases announced each day are linked to members within households, rather than to others in the community, he added.
instances of community transmission are also not linked to "dramatic movements" such as parties, but mundane activities such as grocery shopping, he said.
apart from the cluster linked to the jem and westgate malls, there have been no other major locations over the past 10 days where the virus has spread significantly, mr ong added.
"so, all in all, we are nudging in the right direction.
.
.
but this wave of infection is not over, and we must continue to stay alert and vigilant in order to suppress it further.
"mr wong reiterated the need for heightened vigilance.
"as much as there is a chance of us relaxing some of the measures after june 13 if things continue to improve, we must also be mentally prepared that we cannot rule out the possibility of further restrictions down the road if they become necessary," he said.
mr wong pointed out that there are still unlinked cases every day, each of which could easily be a super spreader.
"we are taking steps to contain the fire and to minimise its spread, but the embers of the fire are still out there, and they can easily spark another major flare-up.
"so the situation is highly fluid, and our assessments are being updated on a daily basis," he said.
the authorities are studying recent cases to find out if there are common patterns of activity that might suggest new areas of risk.
venues where people gather, or where there are consistent breaches of safe management measures, will also be closed, he said.
mr wong commended singaporeans for playing their part in the fight.
"all of you have demonstrated tremendous discipline and social responsibility over the past two to three weeks.
so, thank you very much for this tremendous response.
"join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
allowing access to vaccines in use elsewhere will give people in singapore more options, said dr danny soon, a member of the expert committee on covid-19 vaccination, at a live panel discussion yesterday organised by the straits times.
more than 30,000 people here cannot take the pfizer-biontech and moderna mrna vaccines approved for use in singapore because of medical reasons.
the mrna vaccines have led to some people developing allergic reactions both here and overseas.
people with a history of a potentially life-threatening reaction known as anaphylaxis have been advised not to take these vaccines.
the ministry of health said on monday that it would allow unregistered new covid-19 vaccines through the private healthcare sector.
such vaccines use different technology to help the body create immunity against the virus that causes covid-19.
they include the viral vector vaccines from johnson & johnson and oxford- astrazeneca as well as the inactivated virus vaccine from sinopharm.
all of them have been approved by the world health organisation for emergency use and are in use in other countries.
the government will not subsidise these vaccines, and anyone who chooses to get these jabs will not be eligible for the vaccine injury financial assistance programme for covid-19 vaccination should they have serious adverse effects.
dr soon, the chief executive of the consortium for clinical research and innovation, singapore, said the suggested cause of some allergic reactions could be certain ingredients in the mrna vaccine lipid nanoparticles, which envelop the mrna molecules.
so, "some diversity" in vaccine types would be useful.
these include inactivated virus vaccines, and those that use a viral vector or a safe, modified virus as a delivery system.
dr soon said storage conditions for the mrna vaccines can be an issue.
"there are still some parts of the supply chain for which they need to be stored at minus 70 deg c. "viral vector vaccines are "much more robust", as they are more stable and can be stored at fridge temperatures.
joyce teoget the new paper on your phone with the free tnp app.
download from the apple app store or google play store now
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
jerusalem (reuters) a last-gasp legal challenge by israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu to thwart a bid by a rival rightist to head a new government was rejected on tuesday (june 1) as his opponents raced to seal a pact that would unseat him.
mr naftali bennett, mr netanyahu's former defence minister, announced on sunday he would join a proposed alliance with centrist opposition leader yair lapid, serving as its premier first under a rotation deal.
they have until wednesday midnight (5am thursday in singapore) to present a final pact to president reuven rivlin, who handed mr lapid the task of forming a new government after mr netanyahu failed to do so in the wake of a close election on march 23. hoping to beat the deadline, mr lapid, mr bennett and other party leaders convened to clinch coalition agreements, sources briefed on the talks said.
in a letter to the legal counsels of the presidency and parliament, mr netanyahu's conservative likud said mr lapid was not authorised to cede the premiership to mr bennett.
but president rivlin's office said in response that there was no legal merit to likud's claim because mr lapid would be sworn in as "alternate prime minister", second to serve as premier as part of the rotation.
it accepted likud's argument that mr lapid must provide the president with full details of the new government and not just announce that he has clinched a coalition deal.
the lapid-bennett power-share may include other rightist politicians as well as liberal and centre-left parties.
israeli media have speculated it could also court parliamentary backing from a party that draws votes from israel's arab minority.
that has prompted mr netanyahu to accuse mr bennett of imperiling israel as it contends with internal jewish-arab strife over last month's gaza conflict, the moribund peace process with the palestinians, and iran.
mr netanyahu, 71, is the dominant political figure of his generation.
he was first elected prime minister in 1996 and he returned to power in 2009, holding the top office for more than a decade.
but he also faces a corruption trial for bribery, fraud and breach of trust charges he denies.
a photo-shopped picture of mr bennett in an arab headdress, circulated on social media, prompted comparisons with attempts to discredit former prime minister yitzhak rabin, assassinated in 1995 by an ultranationalist opposed to his peacemaking.
an israeli security source said mr bennett had received parliamentary bodyguards on the recommendation of the shin bet domestic intelligence agency due to the "atmosphere of incitement" against them.
mr lapid and mr bennett have said they want to bring together israelis from across the political divide and end hateful political discourse.
"a country that is divided and violent won't be able to deal with iran or with the economy.
a leadership that incites us against one another harms our ability to deal with the challenges we face," mr lapid said.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
coronavirus variants with clunky, alphanumeric names have now been assigned the letters of the greek alphabet in a bid to simplify discussion and pronunciation while avoiding stigma.
the world health organisation revealed the new names on monday (may 31) amid criticism that those given by scientists such as the so-called south african variant which goes by multiple names including b.
1.
351, 501y.
v2 and 20h/501y.
v2 were too complicated.
as such, the four coronavirus variants considered of concern by the un agency and known generally by the public as the uk, south africa, brazil and india variants have now been given the letters alpha, beta, gamma, delta according to the order of their detection.
other variants of interest continue down the alphabet.
"while they have their advantages, these scientific names can be difficult to say and recall, and are prone to misreporting," said the who, explaining the decision.
the choice of the greek alphabet came after months of deliberations in which other possibilities such as greek gods and invented, pseudo-classical names were considered by experts, according to bacteriologist mark pallen who was involved in the talks.
but many were already brands, companies or alien names.
another idea to refer to variants of concern as voc1, voc2 etc.
was scrapped after he pointed out it resembled an english swear word.
[[nid:530063]]historically, viruses have often been associated with the locations from which they are thought to have emerged such as ebola which is named after the eponymous congolese river.
but this can be damaging for the places and often inaccurate such as with the so-called 'spanish flu' pandemic of 1918 whose origins are unknown.
"no country should be stigmatised for detecting and reporting variants," said who epidemiologist maria van kerkhove.
before the new who scheme, some scientists had adopted their own simplified nomenclature for variants such as a february paper using bird names.
however, it was criticised on the grounds that this could imperil birds and by the mother of a girl named 'robin'.
vatican city: pope francis updated the catholic church's criminal code on tuesday (jun 1), adding directives on punishing sexual abuse crimes of minors by priests that have long been sought by activists against paedophilia.
revision of the penal sanctions within the code of canon law followed a lengthy process involving input from canonist and criminal law experts and came after repeated complaints by victims of sexual abuse and others that the code's previous wording was outdated and not transparent.
the purpose of the revision, wrote francis in introducing the changes, is "restoration of justice, the reform of the offender, and the repair of scandal".
since becoming pope in 2013, the argentine pontiff has striven to tackle the decades-long sexual abuse scandals involving catholic priests around the globe, although many activists against paedophilia insist much more needs to be done.
he convened an unprecedented summit on clerical sex abuse in 2019 while lifting secrecy rules that hindered investigations of abusing priests, among other measures.
the new code falls short of explicitly spelling out sexual offences against minors yet refers to offences against the sixth commandment, which prohibits adultery.
a priest is to be stripped of his office and punished "with other just penalties" if he commits such offences with a minor, the new code says.
similarly, a priest who grooms or induces a minor "to expose himself or herself pornographically or to take part in pornographic exhibitions" will be similarly punished.
need for justiceone aim of the revision, wrote francis, was to reduce the number of penalties left to the discretion of judges, especially in the most serious cases.
"the new text introduces various modifications to the law in force and sanctions some new criminal offences, which respond to the increasingly widespread need in the various communities to see justice and order reestablished that the crime has shattered," he wrote.
other technical improvements related to "the right of defence, the statute of limitations for criminal action, a more precise determination of penalties", added francis.
the changes will take effect in december.
despite recent measures to root out abuse by priests and increase transparency, some victims say the vatican still has not gone far enough to protect children even in the west, where intense media coverage of paedophile priests has led to greater scrutiny of church practices.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
holidaymakers face missing out on summer breaks as testing laboratories struggle to return results on time, which?
has warned.
the private testing system is already being pushed to the brink of collapse even though britons are only allowed to travel to a tiny number of countries, the consumer group said.
which?
said it would be "carnage" when more countries are added to the green list, as anticipated this month.
rory boland, travel editor of which?, said: "the best-case scenario is that you've booked a package holiday and the test is booked with the tour operator.
that way if you don't get the result back they will allow you to move the departure.
but that's not a given and will be no consolation© times newspapers limited 2021. registered in england no.
894646.  registered office: 1 london bridge street, se1 9gf.
wednesday 2 june 2021abu dhabiuaewednesday jun 02, 202135°h:35 °l:31 °h:35 °l:30 °h:34 °l:30 °h:35 °l:30 °h:33 °l:29 °h:35 °l:30 °h:34 °l:32 °abu dhabiuae wednesday jun 2,2021please follow the instructions below to allow notifications to be sent from the nationalabu dhabi, uaewednesday 2 june 2021please follow the instructions below to allow notifications to be sent from the nationaljune 1, 2021june 1, 2021dubai is open for tourists and looks set to be a popular destination for europeansjune 1, 2021june 1, 2021as vaccination programmes around the world start to bear fruit, dubai tourist chiefs hope the emirate will be the beneficiary of a new travel boom.
flight bookings from the uk to dubai have already more than doubled for the last week of august, according to travel analyst forwardkeys.
holidays have got a lot more complicated thanks to covid-19, so what do you need to remember if you're travelling to dubai for a summer break?the national found out.
make sure you will be allowed into the country.
dubai is open for tourists, but travel from some countries is still restricted because they have high levels of covid-19 or new variants of the coronavirus.
the emirates airline website is regularly updated, so before you book it is worth checking for the last-minute changes.
at the time of writing, emirates said all passengers who had travelled from or transited through india, bangladesh, pakistan and sri lanka in the last 14 days would not be accepted for travel to dubai, or allowed to transfer through dubai.
emirates has suspended flights from india until at least june 30. passenger services from sao paulo in brazil also remain suspended until further notice.
the rules are different for uae nationals, golden visa holders and members of diplomatic missions.
it might have been a while since you last took a flight, so double check the validity of your travel documents, in particular if you are travelling with children.
as a visitor your passport should be valid for a minimum period of six months from the date of entry into the uae.
if you're transiting the uae (and not passing through immigration) your passport needs to have a minimum of three months validity from the date of transit.
emirates has a useful tool you can use to check your passport requirements.
most passport holders are eligible for a visa on arrival at no cost.
however, others may need to apply for a visit visa from dubai immigration before travelling.
check your status on the visit dubai website.
﻿think about travel insurance as you book your ticket, so you can be sure you are covered if you fall ill in dubai.
airlines such as emirates or etihad airways offer passengers free travel insurance that covers covid-19 treatment, but many do not.
global insurers such as axa and major us providers including cat 70 and john hancock, have specific covid-19 packages to cover all eventualities.
insurance packages can be found for as little as $25 and cover tens of thousands of dollars worth of treatment.
all passengers travelling to dubai from any point of origin, including gcc countries, must hold a negative covid‐19 pcr test certificate for a test taken no more than 72 hours before departure.
children aged under 12 and passengers who have a moderate or severe disability are exempt from taking a covid‐19 pcr test.
the certificate must be a polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test, and it must come from either a uae government designated laboratory, or a trusted and certified laboratory in your country of origin.
other test certificates including antibody tests and home testing kits are not accepted in dubai.
travellers must bring an official, printed certificate in english or arabic to check in.
text message and digital certificates are not accepted by emirates check-in staff.
pcr certificates in other languages are only acceptable if they can be validated at the originating station.
for passengers arriving from certain countries, the covid‐19 pcr report must include a qr code linked to the original report for verification purposes.
these countries are bangladesh, india, islamic republic of pakistan, sudan, lebanon, egypt and ethiopia.
furthermore, passengers flying from india, pakistan, nigeria or bangladesh, must get a certificate from one of the labs listed in the designated laboratories to be accepted on the flight.
some passengers arriving in dubai are required to take another covid‐19 pcr test on arrival at dubai international airport.
these tests are free of charge, and the result is usually sent via text message to your mobile phone within 24 hours.
the list of countries can be found on the emirates website, and includes cyprus, israel, the philippines, russia and turkey.
if you take a test at the airport, you must remain in your hotel or residence until you receive the test result.
if the test is positive, you will be required to undergo isolation and follow the dubai health authority guidelines.
you must also download the covid – dxb smart app, which is available on google play and the apple store, free of charge.
once you arrive in dubai you are advised to download the al hosn app, which will warn you if you come into close contact with someone who has tested positive.
vaccinated tourists can also use it to prove they have been inoculated in their home country.
you can do this by registering the "unified number" (uid) listed on your visa.
if you do not do this, you can still prove your vaccinated status by showing an electronic certificate on your smartphone.
under a month-long trial which started on may 26, vaccinated tourists are allowed to attend live events like concerts and sports events, and weddings of up to 100 people in dubai.
they can also go to certain areas of bars, pubs and nightclubs.
paper copies of vaccination certificates will not be accepted.
nearly every hotel, restaurant and attraction is now open in dubai, but there are still some covid-19 restrictions designed to prevent the transmission of the virus.
masks must be warn at all times, apart from when people are sitting down at a table to eat, or when they are undertaking strenuous exercise.
people are required to maintain physical distance of two metres from others, and there are heavy fines of dh3,000 ($816) for those caught not wearing a mask or failing to socially distance.
the number of people who can sit at one table is 10 at restaurants and cafes, and four at shisha cafes.
parties and weddings held in private homes are capped at 30 guests.
passengers leaving dubai only need to do a covid‐19 pcr test if it is mandated by the country they are travelling to, so check the requirements carefully.
usually, such tests have to be taken no more than 72 hours before your flight, so make sure you plan ahead.
in dubai it is cheap and easy to book a test at an authorised laboratory, and you should receive the test results in 24 hours, but it can take longer.
research your travel destination, as the authorities might require a certificate printed out, or for you to download a local tracing app.
updated: june 1, 2021 11:32 am
                                                                    uk records zero daily covid deaths for first time since march 2020uk's vaccine minister urges g7 nations to fight vaccine misinformation eu digital covid passport launches in time for peak summer seasonwho approves sinovac covid-19 vaccine uae covid-19 vaccine drive crosses 80 per cent threshold * please select onemillions of needle-shaped sea creatures found on dubai beachesuae likely to strike travel corridor deals with europe and us, says dubai airports chiefwarning over outdoor exercise as early uae summer sends temperatures soaringdubai safari shuts its gates until septembersharjah ruler raises minimum wage for emiratis to dh25,000millions of needle-shaped sea creatures found on dubai beachesuae likely to strike travel corridor deals with europe and us, says dubai airports chiefwarning over outdoor exercise as early uae summer sends temperatures soaringdubai safari shuts its gates until septembersharjah ruler raises minimum wage for emiratis to dh25,000choose how you want to print
it's not everyday that the prime minister addresses the entire country – you could sense some holding their breath as they brace for impact.
while some were hoping for the possible easing of restrictions or intrigued with the introduction of new measures, others had more important things in mind: what colour shirt would pm wear or would his magic cup make another appearance?
now that the dust has settled, let's look at highlights from yesterday's announcements.
and there's no better way to do so than in the form of memes.
not now sweetie, mommy needs to watch pm lee drink from his magic cup pic.
twitter.
com/uaiapo9tvhpm lee: see y'all on monday at 4pm
singapore:pic.
twitter.
com/ybdeqtfvwphere we go again pic.
twitter.
com/rvwgvana9rat the next announcement, pm lee might return with the og magic cup.
he could also mark the dawn of a new era by giving a new magic cup its debut appearance.
who knows?till then, the nation waits in anticipation.
amierul@asiaone.
com
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
allowing access to vaccines that are already in use elsewhere will give people in singapore more options, said dr danny soon, a member of the expert committee on covid-19 vaccination, at a live panel discussion yesterday on living with covid-19 organised by the straits times.
more than 30,000 people here are not able to take the pfizer-biontech and moderna mrna vaccines approved for use in singapore because of medical reasons.
the mrna vaccines have led to some people developing allergic reactions both here and overseas.
people with a history of a potentially life-threatening reaction known as anaphylaxis have been advised not to take these vaccines.
the ministry of health said on monday that it would allow unregistered new covid-19 vaccines through the private healthcare sector.
such vaccines use different vaccine technology to help the body create immunity against the virus that causes covid-19.
they include the viral vector vaccines from johnson & johnson and oxford-astrazeneca as well as the inactivated virus vaccine from sinopharm.
all of them have been approved by the world health organisation for emergency use and are already in use in other countries.
while this would give people here more options, the government will not subsidise the cost of these vaccines, and anyone who chooses to get these jabs will not be eligible for the vaccine injury financial assistance programme for covid-19 vaccination should they experience serious adverse effects.
dr soon, the chief executive of the consortium for clinical research and innovation, singapore, said the suggested cause of some allergic reactions could be certain ingredients in the mrna vaccine lipid nanoparticles, which envelop the mrna molecules to protect them and help them enter human cells.
so, "some diversity" in vaccine types would be useful.
these include inactivated virus vaccines, and those that use a viral vector or a safe, modified virus as a delivery system.
these vaccines also provide slightly different immune responses, so one thing that is being looked at is whether or not to mix vaccine types to get broader immune coverage.
this entails giving one type of vaccine first, and another type as booster shots.
>30k number of people in singapore who are not able to take the pfizer-biontech and moderna mrna vaccines because of medical reasons.
dr soon said the exacting storage conditions for the mrna vaccines can be an issue.
"there are still some parts of the supply chain for which they need to be stored at minus 70 deg c. "he said viral vector vaccines are "much more robust", as they are more stable and can be stored at fridge temperatures.
they use a harmless, weakened adenovirus "common" viruses that cause illnesses like colds to carry genetic instructions into the body to prompt cells to mount an immune response.
inactivated virus vaccines like the sinopharm and sinovac vaccines use actual coronaviruses taken from infected patients.
"they are inactivated through chemical means, and so they are no longer alive and they can't replicate and they can't cause disease," said dr soon.
the body mounts an immune response to the coronavirus proteins, and this helps a person build up immunity, he explained.
joyce teojoin st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
kuala lumpur: malaysia's daily covid-19 cases may hit the 13,000 mark by jun 14 if covid-19 measures are not followed, according to its health ministry's projections.
according to modelling data published on monday (may 31), covid-19 cases will increase sharply in june if people fail to comply with standard operating procedures.
the number of new cases in malaysia has been on an upward trend since april this year, reaching arecord 9,020 new cases on may 29, although the numbers have dipped since.
health director-general noor hisham abdullah on monday evening said that malaysia is "not out of the woods yet".
"please stay at home and embrace self-lockdown.
if you need to attend to urgent matters please adhere to all sops.
pray that this lockdown will flatten the curve in time," he said in a tweet.
thelatest outbreakhas been more severe, partly due to highly transmissible variants.
to curb the wave of infections, malaysia began atwo-week national lockdownon tuesday.
mosteconomic sectorsare closed andshopping malls have also been shuttered.
supermarkets and other premises dealing in basic necessities are allowed to operate.
only two people from each household are allowed to go out to buy essentials or for medical services, with movement limited to a 10km radius.
nearly 900 patients in icumalaysia reported 7,105 new covid-19 cases on tuesday.
the country now has a total of 579,462 cases, of which 80,474 are currently active or infectious.
the klang valley accounted for more than a third of the new cases with 2,068 in selangor and 817 in kuala lumpur.
sarawak reported 703 new infections while penang and johor had 400 and 431 new cases respectively.
the health ministry also announced 71 more covid-19 fatalities, comprising 69 malaysians and two foreigners aged 27 to 93. malaysia's death toll now stands at 2,867. there are currently a record 872 patients in the intensive care unit (icu), of which 419 require respiratory support.
dr noor hisham on saturday said that when active covid-19 cases overwhelm the treatment capacity of hospitals, medical personnel are forced to prioritise icu beds for patients with high recovery potential instead of those with a poor prognosis.
the reality is that medical frontliners are faced with this "difficult choice", he said.
dr noor hisham added that government hospital morgues are at capacity and that the authorities are currently finding it challenging to accommodate the increasing number of fatalities.
as a result, corpses are being stored in special containers provided by the forensic medical unit, he said.
the health ministry on tuesday also identified 27 new clusters, another record.
the country currently has 668 active clusters.
thirteen clusters were at workplaces while three were linked to religious activities.
of the eight community clusters, three in sarawak, kelantan and perak were linked to festive household visiting activities.
two other clusters have been linked to education institutions while the remaining cluster was traced to an elderly care centre in kuala lumpur.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore at least eight major retail landlords from the private sector and all government landlords have committed to abide by a new code of conduct on the leasing of retail premises in singapore.
the code is aimed at making lease negotiations between landlords and retail tenants fairer and more balanced.
with effect from tuesday (june 1), capitaland, city developments (cdl), frasers property retail, mercatus co-operative, uol group and sph reit, as well as all government landlords such as jtc corporation and the housing board, will abide by the code of conduct, which sets out fair guidelines for lease negotiations in 11 areas.
these include rental structure, third-party fees, pre-termination by landlords or tenants, and data sharing.
the code also sets out a process for resolving disputes after lease agreements have been signed.
guocoland will adopt the code of conduct for all new leases signed after june 1, ms valerie wong, its general manager (asset management), said on tuesday.
hong leong holdings said the group has been "working closely with its tenants to ensure the livelihoods and well-being of its retail and f&b tenants since the pandemic began".
"hong leong remains committed to enabling fair and balanced lease negotiations," it said.
business leaders representing the major retail landlords and tenants in singapore have been appointed as members of the fair tenancy industry committee (ftic), which will act as custodian of the code of conduct.
mr max loh, managing partner of ernst & young singapore and brunei, has been appointed chairman of the 13-member committee.
he said he is "honoured to play a role in charting the future of retail leasing practices in singapore".
at the inaugural ftic meeting on may 19, minister of state for trade and industry low yen ling said: "all government landlords will lead by example and adopt the code from june 1.
"ms low added: "this code for fair and balanced lease negotiations provides businesses with greater stability and flexibility to weather disruptions, and the critical ability to work out possible solutions and navigate the crisis together.
"singapore business federation (sbf) chief executive lam yi young said that the "sbf and ftic will continue to reach out to the landlords to bring more on board the code".
he noted that some current lease agreements are already compliant with the code.
"as the government has accepted the recommendation to make the code mandatory via legislation, we urge all landlords to start making adjustments to their leasing practices to align with the code as soon as possible," mr lam said.
mr low chee wah, ceo of frasers property retail, said: "from june 1, we will be adopting the code of conduct-compliant lease agreements for new leases in our retail portfolio, and we have started working closely with our tenants on this front.
"the adoption of the code of conduct by all stakeholders will be instrumental in forging a stronger landlord-tenant relationship.
"mr andrew kwan, president of the restaurant association of singapore and group managing director of commonwealth capital, said: "the impending legislation of the code of conduct is a watershed for tenants and landlords alike.
the early adoption by several key operators and enterprises, ahead of legislation, is the true test of enlightened thinking and support.
"the tenants' group has conducted initial briefings to its constituent members and will continue to roll out engagements in the months ahead.
"the committee will conduct regular outreach to industry players to keep them updated on industry developments, monitor the industry's compliance with the code of conduct, and provide the government with feedback and recommendations to enhance it.
on tuesday, the sbf launched the ftic website, which will allow businesses to provide feedback on the code of conduct and matters related to retail tenancies.
landlords and tenants will also be able to file for mutually agreed upon deviations that are permitted under the code.
key areas covered in the code of conduct for fair tenancy include: 1.  conduct and spirit of negotiationslandlords and tenants must adopt a consensual approach to negotiate in good faith, which includes acting honestly and fairly, having regard to the legitimate interests of the other party, and observing accepted or reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing in the performance of identified obligations.
they must not attempt to profit unfairly or take unfair advantage of each other.
2.  leasing principles for key tenancy termsthe code sets out the leasing principles for landlords and tenants under 11 key tenancy terms.
these include exclusivity, pre-termination by landlords due to landlord's redevelopment works, sales performance and pre-termination by tenants.
3.  data transparencylandlords must share sales data metrics by trade category – such as total monthly sales and total floor area – on a one-on-one basis with the tenant before the signing of the lease agreement.
they must share the data with existing tenants on a bi-annual basis if they collect sales data from tenants as part of the gross turnover rent structure.
4.  dispute resolution & enforcementparties can report non-compliant cases to the fair tenancy industry committee (ftic).
all lease agreements must be accompanied by a checklist of clauses within the code of conduct, and all clauses which deviate from the code must be flagged by landlord for the tenant's attention.
for clauses where the code of conduct allows for deviation, a joint declaration of deviation shall be filed with ftic within 14 days of signing the lease agreement.
should there be a dispute, either party may escalate the matter to the singapore mediation centre.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
widespread distrust of the prayut government is aggravating sinovac hesitancy in the country, says an analyst.
bangkok: thailand is suffering through the third – and the most serious – wave of covid-19 infections that has surged since early april.
as of may 27, the total infections since apr 1 topped 112,354, with 785 related deaths.
the more virulent variants first identified in india and south africa have been detected, prompting the prayut chan-o-cha government to speed up the vaccine rollout.
astrazeneca and sinovac are the two vaccines currently in use.
the government has secured about 117,000 imported astrazeneca shots, with another 61 million shots in local production.
the first batch of these – about 1.
7 million doses – will be distributed by june.
up to 6 million sinovac doses from china have been delivered, making sinovac the most widely deployed vaccine in thailand.
however, widespread distrust of the prayut government is aggravating sinovac hesitancy in the country.
public trust in the prayut government is low, and citizens lack confidence in the safety of the vaccines obtained by the government.
sinovac has been subject to widespread criticism on a number of grounds.
unlike most other covid-19 vaccines in use, sinovac is an inactivated vaccine developed from dead microorganisms.
this means that while the risk of side effects is low, the vaccine may not offer high protection rates against infection.
lurking anti-china sentimentat a broader societal level, sinovac being chinese has not helped its acceptance.
china – in the eyes of many thais – is viewed with suspicion and even hostility, and products from china are widely viewed as cheap and lacking quality.
sinovac also faces politically motivated problems as thailand under prayut is widely perceived by critics of the prayut government as beholden to china.
the 2014 coup complicated thailand's relations with the west.
china, which did not criticise thailand's return to military rule under prayut, appeared to be a more attractive major power ally.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
the thai economy has since become more reliant on chinese investment and tourism.
bilateral defence ties have strengthened significantly, with arms sales, active military exchanges, and the controversial purchase of chinese submarines.
unlike some of its neighbours, thailand has no territorial or maritime rights dispute with china, and this helps stabilise the relationship.
china's pandemic diplomacy further thickened bilateral ties as china donated medical supplies and, more recently, sinovac vaccine doses to the prayut government.
china's rising involvement and influence naturally fuels worry and latent anti-china sentiment.
sinophobia is particularly prevalent among young, pro-western and pro-democracy thai internet users who see prayut's government and china's regime as "birds of the same feather".
conservative supporters of prayut are labelled as identical to chinese nationalists.
anti-china feelings, coupled with the prayut government's reliance on sinovac and slow procurement of more reputed alternatives, have been exploited by opposition parties.
earlier this year, phuea thai – the leading opposition party – voiced concern about the safety and transparency of sinovac.
move forward party's spokesperson has engaged in online spats with health minister anutin charnvirakul over the efficacy of sinovac.
despite their avowed opposition, opposition parliamentarians have said that they have no choice but to get vaccinated with government-imposed vaccines.
heated exchanges over sinovacresistance to sinovac, as to the prayut government, is stronger among young thai netizens.
the a-list celebrity chompoo araya recently sparked a fierce online backlash when she announced that she has been injected with sinovac and provided a review of the vaccination process, noting that the "best vaccine is the one you can get first".
many twitter users were convinced that the review was politically motivated and expressed their disappointment in the star for "supporting" the unreliable government and the "bottom-tier" vaccine.
some users pointed out that chompoo was silent when the police violently clashed with protesters last year and concluded that she is "against progressive developments".
hardliners fueled the heated exchange by creating a list of celebrities who have spoken out in favour of sinovac.
defenders argued that celebrities – whether they are hired by the government or not – are free to get this jab.
the uproar escalated when political figures from the anti-government and pro-establishment camps joined in.
pannika wanich from the dissolved future forward party sarcastically asked whether chompoo's fame is rooted in the support from the government or the public.
in contrast, deputy health minister satit pitutach praised chompoo for her decision while seri wongmontha – a media personality actively involved in the protests against the yingluck government that led to the 2014 coup – said that facts had been distorted to discredit the prayut government.
the vaccine drama over sinovac is the latest example of thailand's widening and deepening political polarisation.
the prayut government's close ties to china and the growing role of digital media have exacerbated tensions between the so-called authoritarian nationalists and pro-democracy revolutionaries.
both sides are losing the willingness to tolerate disagreement.
sadly, there is little room left for people in the middle ground who view politics beyond black and white.
tita sanglee is an independent analyst and a business owner based in thailand.
this article wasfirst publishedby iseas – yusof ishak institute as a commentary in fulcrum.
geneva: the world health organization on tuesday (jun 1) approved the sinovac covid-19 vaccine for emergency use the second chinese jab to receive the who's green light.
the un health agency signed off on the beijing-based firm sinovac's two-dose vaccine coronavac, which is already being deployed in several countries around the world.
"i'm happy to announce that the sinovac-coronavac vaccine has been given who emergency use listing after being found to be safe, effective, and quality-assured," who chief tedros adhanom ghebreyesus told a press conference.
"the easy storage requirements of coronavac make it very suitable for low-resource settings," he added.
"it's now crucial to get these life-saving tools to the people that need them quickly.
"the who said the emergency use listing (eul) gives countries, funders, procuring agencies and communities assurance that the vaccine has met international standards.
last month sinopharm became the first chinese vaccine to be approved by the who.
the organisation has also given eul status to vaccines being made by pfizer/biontech, moderna, johnson & johnson, and the astrazeneca jab being produced in india, south korea and the eu, which it counts separately.
who's listing paves the way for countries worldwide to approve and import a vaccine for distribution quickly, especially those states without an international-standard regulator of their own.
it also opens the door for the jabs to enter the covax global vaccine-sharing facility, which aims to provide equitable access to doses around the world, particularly in poorer countries.
currently only astrazeneca and some pfizer jabs are flowing through the scheme.
"the world desperately needs multiple covid-19 vaccines to address the huge access inequity across the globe," said mariangela simao, the who's assistant director general for access to health products.
"we urge manufacturers to participate in the covax facility, share their know-how and data and contribute to bringing the pandemic under control.
"efficacy rate"who recommends the vaccine for use in adults 18 years and older, in a two-dose schedule with a spacing of two to four weeks," the agency said in a statement.
"vaccine efficacy results showed that the vaccine prevented symptomatic disease in 51 percent of those vaccinated and prevented severe covid-19 and hospitalisation in 100 percent of the studied population.
"the sinovac vaccine contains an inactivated form of coronavirus that cannot cause the disease.
it also has a substance that helps strengthen the immune response to the vaccine.
when given the shot, the immune system identifies the inactivated virus as foreign and makes antibodies against it, which will then recognise the active virus and defend the body against it.
few people aged over 60 took part in the clinical trial of sinovac's jab.
however, the who said there should be no upper age limit on the vaccine as there is "no reason to believe it has a different safety profile" in older generations.
the sinovac jab is already in use in 22 territories around the world, according to an afp count.
apart from china, the countries using sinovac include chile, brazil, indonesia, mexico, thailand and turkey.
chen xu, china's ambassador in geneva, said coronavac's eul status expanded the number of global tools to fight the pandemic.
"china will continue to work with the international community to promote the accessibility and affordability of covid-19 vaccines especially in (the) developing world," he said in a tweet.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
myanmar protesters took to the streets on tuesday (jun 1) in several districts, as fighting between the army and anti-junta militias raged in border areas, four months after the military ousted an elected government in a coup.
myanmar's military is still struggling to impose order after arresting aung san suu kyi and senior leaders of her party, sparking nationwide protests and paralysing strikes.
in the far south of myanmar, anti-military protesters staged a march in laung lone, a photograph posted by the irrawaddy newspaper on social media showed.
meanwhile, in the commercial hub of yangon a group of mainly young protesters rallied in the district of kamayut, photographs posted by the myanmar now news portal showed.
"this is not over yet.
we still have our turn," read a sign written on a sheet carried by one protester.
demonstrators in urban areas have had to become more nimble to avoid security forces, often using flash mobs or staging small unannounced protests, after larger rallies in the first months after the coup were often met with security forces firing live rounds.
decades-old conflicts between the military and ethnic minority armies in border areas have also reignited since the coup.
ethnic militias allied with a shadow civilian government have stepped up attacks on the army, which has responded with heavy weapons and air strikes, forcing thousands to flee.
mobile phone footage obtained from a resident in kayah state bordering thailand showed what appeared to be artillery being fired from inside the state capital loikaw into demoso, about 14.
5km away, where a people's defence force said it had attacked troops and was coming under heavy fire.
residents in loikaw said that about 50 rounds had been fired on monday and six on tuesday morning.
"the sound of artillery is deafening us," a resident told reuters on monday, requesting anonymity due to safety concerns.
the karenni nationalities defence force, a militia active in kayah state, said in a post on its facebook page that 80 army soldiers had been killed on monday, while one of its fighters and a civilian were also casualties.
reuters could not verify the claim and a spokesman for the junta did not answer calls seeking comment.
fighting in kayah has displaced about 37,000 people in recent weeks, according to the united nations.
many have fled into jungles and are in need of food and medicine.
civilian forces, often armed with rudimentary rifles and limited training, have been formed in towns and regions across myanmar to challenge the military, in support of a national unity government that the junta says is treasonous.
security forces have killed 840 people since the coup, according to figures provided by an activist group.
junta chief min aung hlaing has said the toll was nearer 300, and has said it is unlikely there will be a civil war in myanmar.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore: singapore reported 16 new covid-19 cases in the community as of noon on monday (may 31), including three with no links to previous infections.
thirteen were linked to previous cases, with 11 already on quarantine and two detected through surveillance, said the ministry of health (moh).
there were also seven imported cases, all of whom were placed on stay-home notice upon arrival in singapore.
one singaporean and three permanent residents who returned from india, indonesia, malaysia and the philippines are among the imported cases.
another three are work permit holders who arrived from indonesia and myanmar, of whom one is a foreign domestic worker.
no new infections were reported in migrant workers' dormitories.
in all, singapore reported 23 new covid-19 cases on monday.
white sands primary school employee among unlinked casesa 60-year-old singaporean is among the three unlinked infections.
the woman, who is fully vaccinated, works in an administrative role at white sands primary school.
she developed a fever, cough and runny nose on may 28 and sought treatment at a general practitioner clinic on may 30.  she underwent both an antigen rapid test (art) and polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test, and both test results came back positive for covid-19 infection on the same day.
her serology test result is pending.
the other two cases are a 68-year-old singaporean who works as a manager at phoenix entertainment karaoke tv music lounge and a 72-year-old singaporean homemaker.
both experienced symptoms such as headache and cough prior to testing positive for covid-19.
hong ye group cleaners clusterfour more cases have been linked to the hong ye group cleaners cluster, which now has a total of 21 infections.
there is an 11-year-old singaporean who is a student at new town primary school.
he was last in school on may 18 and developed a fever on may 20 but did not seek medical attention.
the boy subsequently developed a fever, diarrhea and vomiting on may 26 and sought medical treatment at a general practitioner clinic the next day, where he was diagnosed with stomach flu and was therefore not tested for covid-19.
he was later identified as a household contact of five covid-19 cases, and placed on quarantined on may 28.  he was tested for covid-19 on may 30 and his result came back positive on the same day while his serology test result is pending.
the second case is an 18-year-old singaporean who is employed by hong ye group as a cleaner at changi business park.
as he had been identified as a contact of a previously confirmed case another hong ye group cleaner who also worked at changi business park he was placed on phone surveillance on may 27. on the same day, he developed a cough and runny nose but did not report his symptoms or seek medical attention.
he developed a loss of taste and smell on may 29 and sought medical treatment at a clinic on the same day, where he underwent both an art and pcr test.
moh said he was immediately isolated when his art result came back positive the same day.
his pcr test result came back positive for covid-19 infection on may 30 and his serology test result is negative.
the other cases include an 18-year-old singaporean who is a full-time national serviceman at the civil defence academy.
he is a family member and household contact of three other confirmed covid-19 cases and was quarantined on may 28. the fully vaccinated teenager was tested for covid-19 on may 30 during quarantine and developed a sore throat on the same day.
his test result came back positive for covid-19 infection on may 30 and his serology test result is pending.
the remaining case is a 16-year-old singaporean who is currently unemployed.
he is also a household contact of five other covid-19 cases and was quarantined on may 28.  he developed a cough and sore throat on the same day but did not report his symptoms.
he was tested for covid-19 on may 30 during quarantine and his test result came back positive for covid-19 infection on the same day.
his serology test result is pending.
ntuc foodfare clustertwo more cases have been linked to the ntuc foodfare cluster, which now has a total of nine infections in total.
one of the new cases is a 33-year-old permanent resident who had already been quarantined.
he works as a supervisor at hua zai hk style roasted delight rice noodle and is a household contact of five previously confirmed cases.
the other new case is a 33-year-old malaysian who works as a kitchen assistant at hua zai hk style roasted delights at 308 achorvale road and 476d upper serangoon view.
he developed a cough and runny nose on may 30 and sought medical treatment at a clinic where he underwent both an art and pcr test.
he was immediately isolated when his art result came back positive on the same day.
his pcr test result came back positive for covid-19 on may 30 and his serology test result is negative.
new clustera new cluster has been identified, linked to a 49-year-old singaporean who works as an executive at eng soon chair & table hire service.
the woman, known as case 63844, was confirmed to have covid-19 on may 28. two new cases reported on monday have been linked to the woman, bringing the total number of infections in this cluster to three.
the latest cases are an 82-year-old singaporean retiree and a 54-year-old singaporean who works as a senior executive at eng soon chair & table hire service.
both of them are the family members of case 63844.
3 existing clusters growmore cases have been linked to three existing clusters.
a 33-year-old singaporean who works as a manager at changi airport group has been linked to a 31-year-old singaporean who works as a property agent with era realty.
the cluster now has six infections.
two new cases are linked to cluster involving a 15-year-old student at westwood secondary school.
one of the new cases is a nine-year-old singaporean student from chua chu kang primary school who also attends student care at happy star learning hub student care & tuition centre.
the other case is a 45-year-old singaporean homemaker.
both cases are family members and household contacts of previously confirmed covid-19 cases and were asymptomatic.
the cluster now has a total of six infections.
another community case reported on monday is linked to a third cluster involving a previously confirmed case, a 74-year-old singaporean retiree.
a 56-year-old singaporean homemaker has been linked to him, bringing the total number of infections in this cluster to four.
the woman tested positive for covid-19 on may 30 during quarantine and subsequently developed a cough that evening.
moh said her serology test result is negative for the n antigen, which suggests the presence of early infection.
the woman received her first dose of the covid-19 vaccine on apr 27. malaysian admin worker among linked casesthe remaining linked covid-19 community case is a 30-year-old malaysian administrative employee at sin wei precision mechanical.
he is a household contact of a previously confirmed case – a 35-year-old malaysian who worked at kota zheng zong bak kut teh (serangoon gardens) – and was quarantined on may 17. he was tested for covid-19 on may 22 and his test result was negative.
he developed a fever and cough on may 27 but did not report his symptoms until may 30, said moh.
the man was then tested for covid-19 and his test result came back positive on the same day.
his serology test result is negative.
decrease in new community casesoverall the number of new cases in the community has decreased from 185 cases in the week before to 128 cases in the past week.
the number of unlinked cases in the community has also decreased from 32 cases in the week before to 26 cases in the past week.
among the 191 cases reported from may 25 to may 31, 45 cases have tested positive for their serology tests while 110 have tested negative.
another 36 serology test results are pending.
moh said 25 more cases have been discharged from hospitals or community isolation facilities, bringing singapore's total recoveries to 61,459. there are 223 cases still in hospital.
most of them are stable or improving, and two are in critical condition in the intensive care unit.
another 336 are isolated and cared for at community facilities.
as of monday, singapore has reported a total of 62,051 covid-19 cases and 33 fatalities from the disease.
singapore "on track" to bringing covid-19 outbreak under controlprime minister lee hsien loong said singapore "should be on track" tobringing its covid-19 outbreak under control, barring any super-spreader events or large clusters.
if the number of community cases falls further, the country "should be" able to relaxexisting restrictionsunder the phase 2 (heightened alert) period after jun 13, the date that they are currently set to last until, mr lee said in anaddress to the nationon monday.
mr lee also announced plans tomake covid-19 testing part of the new normal, as well as theacceleration of the national vaccination programme, withvaccination bookings for studentsto open on jun 1. the elderly were also urged to come forward for their vaccination.
nearly three quarters of the elderly – 760,000 senior citizens aged 60 and above – have had at least one jab or booked a slot already, but 280,000 have still not yet booked appointments, mr lee said.
those above 60 can now walk into any vaccination centre and get vaccinated on the spot with no need to register or book in advance.
those who are immobile can also be jabbed during home visits by medical professionals, he added.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore dengue cases here are expected to increase, as the population of the aedes aegypti mosquito which transmits dengue and other viruses has grown by about 30 per cent in april, compared with january, said the national environment agency on tuesday (june 1).
the mosquito population has remained high in some residential areas across the island, including clementi west street 1, hougang avenue 6, 8 and 10, jurong east street 32, mei chin road, mei ling street, and stirling road.
over 2,700 dengue cases have been reported since the start of this year and there are currently 22 active dengue clusters.
although there have been fewer dengue cases in recent weeks than in the same period last year when a historic outbreak of dengue occurred in singapore the figures remain higher than those of 2017 and 2018 , years that saw 2,772 and 3,285 cases respectively.
there were 35,315 reported dengue cases last year, with 28 deaths.
"as we have now entered the warmer months of the year from june to october, the increased risk of higher dengue transmission is a concern," said the agency.
the nea therefore expects an increasing number of dengue cases due to the accelerated breeding cycle and maturation of the aedes aegypti mosquito vectors meaning it takes less time for the mosquito to become a biting adult in warmer months as well as the shorter incubation period of the dengue virus.
this refers to the time needed for the mosquito to pick up the disease and pass it on.
[[nid:495141]]according to the world health organisation, this period is around eight to 12 days when the temperature is 25 to 28 deg c. since the covid-19 phase two (heightened alert) measures kicked in on may 16, the nea said that more people staying in and working from home could mean more " biting opportunities" for the day-biting aedes aegypti mosquito, and potentially higher risk of dengue transmission.
last august, a study examining the impact of the circuit breaker on the number of dengue infections found there were 50 per cent more cases than usual.
the study, which was conducted in collaboration with the national university of singapore's saw swee hock school of public health, also found that adults aged 20 to 64 made up the majority of infections, since that part of the population would have normally been in the workplace during the day.
in addition, more than half of the positive dengue samples since february were due to the less common dengue serotypes 3 (denv-3) and 4 (denv-4).
serotypes are distinct variations within a particular virus.
there are four dengue serotypes: denv-1, 2, 3 and 4.  the predominant dengue virus serotype in singapore has been denv-2 since 2016. the nea said that since denv-3 has not been dominant for about the last three decades and the incidence rate of denv-4 has also been consistently low, the population immunity for both serotypes is low, making people more likely to get infected.
however, it added that it is too early to say that there has been a switch of dominant dengue virus serotype in singapore.
[[nid:500003]]the denv-3 serotype has been detected in the dengue cluster at cashew terrace and hazel park terrace, while denv-4 has been detected in clusters at hougang central and pasir ris street 21.
"if left unchecked, the high aedes aegypti mosquito population, coupled with the circulation of previously uncommon dengue virus serotypes and a sizeable proportion of people.
.
.
working from home, would add to the dengue risk this year," said the nea.
it urged the public to prevent mosquito breeding by ensuring that stagnant water is removed.
in the meantime, the nea will continue to conduct inspections in areas with higher mosquito population, and has stepped up its operations in dengue cluster areas.
this article was first published in the straits times.
permission required for reproduction.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore tong shing contractors was fined $41,500 for damaging a water main and carrying out works without approval from singapore's water agency pub.
in a statement on tuesday (june 1), pub said the damage to the water pipe led to the loss of 1.
8 million litres of water, enough to fill about two-thirds of an olympic-size swimming pool.
the water leak had affected three traffic lanes in admiralty road west near the junction of dahan road when the incident occurred in december 2018. tong shing was carrying out pipe-jacking works as part of a road-widening project when the pipe-jacking machine punctured the water main, which has a diameter of 70cm, at a depth of about 3.
7m below the road surface.
pub uncovered a hole with a diameter of 30cm on the water main when it went on site to isolate the leak and repair the damage.
its investigations found that tong shing had failed to physically ascertain the exact location and alignment of the water main before the works began.
in addition, tong shing had proceeded with the pipe-jacking works without submitting a plan to do so for pub's approval.
on tuesday, pub reminded contractors that it takes a serious view of water main damage and the water wastage that can be prevented if due diligence is exercised.
"contractors should always refer to pub's advisory on the prevention of damage to water pipe infrastructure before carrying out any construction works," said pub.
under the public utilities act, those who damage a water main or connecting pipe with a diameter of 30cm or more can face a fine of up to $200,000, jail for up to three years, or both.
contractors who carry out works in the vicinity of water mains without an approved plan can be fined up to $10,000.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
geneva (reuters) the world health organisation (who) has approved a covid-19 vaccine made by sinovac biotech for emergency-use listing, the second chinese-produced shot to get its endorsement, a who statement said on tuesday (june 1).
who emergency listing is a signal to national regulators on a product's safety and efficacy.
it would also allow the shot to be included in covax, the global programme to provide vaccines mainly for poor countries, which currently faces major supply problems due to india's suspension of vaccine exports.
in a statement, the independent panel of experts said it recommended sinovac's vaccine for people over 18, with a second dose two to four weeks later.
there was no upper-age limit as data suggested it is likely to have a protective effect on older people.
the who's technical advisory group, which began meeting on may 5, took the decision after reviewing the latest clinical data on the sinovac vaccine's safety and efficacy, as well as the company's manufacturing practices.
branded coronavac in some regions, it is the second chinese developed vaccine to win such who listing to combat covid-19, after the may 7 approval of a shot developed by state-backed sinopharm.
a third chinese vaccine, produced by cansino biologics, has submitted clinical trial data, but no who review has been scheduled.
sinovac said that it had supplied more than 600 million doses of its vaccine at home and abroad as of the end of last month and over 430 million doses have been administered.
vaccine efficacy results showed that the vaccine prevented symptomatic disease in 51 per cent of those vaccinated and prevented severe covid-19 and hospitalisation in 100 per cent of the studied population, the who said.
the who's separate strategic advisory group of experts (sage) had said previously in a review document that vaccine efficacy in multi-country phase three clinical trials ranged from 51 per cent to 84 per cent.
indonesia's health ministry said on may 12 that its study of 120,000 healthcare workers who had received the vaccine found it was 94 per cent effective at preventing symptomatic disease.
in a preliminary evaluation, the sage panel found that the shot was efficacious in preventing covid-19 in adults under 60, but that some quality data on the risk of serious adverse effects was lacking.
it cited evidence gaps in safety in pregnancy, and on safety and clinical protection in older adults, those with underlying disease and evaluation of rare adverse events detected through post-authorisation safety monitoring.
the sage experts, who issue policy recommendations to states and dosage guidelines, reviewed sinovac clinical data last month.
china has already deployed hundreds of millions of doses of both sinopharm and sinovac vaccines at home and exported them to many countries, particularly in latin america, asia and africa.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
geneva: coronavirus variants with clunky, alphanumeric names have now been assigned the letters of the greek alphabet in a bid to simplify discussion and pronunciation while avoiding stigma.
the world health organization revealed the new names on monday amid criticism that those given by scientists such as the so-called south african variant which goes by multiple names including b1351, 501y.
v2 and 20h/501y.
v2 were too complicated.
as such, the four coronavirus variants considered of concern by the un agency and known generally by the public as the uk, south africa, brazil and india variants have now been given the letters alpha, beta, gamma, delta according to the order of their detection.
other variants of interest continue down the alphabet.
"while they have their advantages, these scientific names can be difficult to say and recall, and are prone to misreporting," said the who, explaining the decision.
the choice of the greek alphabet came after months of deliberations in which other possibilities such as greek gods and invented, pseudo-classical names were considered by experts, according to bacteriologist mark pallen who was involved in the talks.
but many were already brands, companies or alien names.
another idea to refer to variants of concern as voc1, voc2 etc.
was scrapped after he pointed out it resembled an english swear word.
historically, viruses have often been associated with the locations from which they are thought to have emerged such as ebola which is named after the eponymous congolese river.
but this can be damaging for the places and often inaccurate such as with the so-called 'spanish flu' pandemic of 1918 whose origins are unknown.
"no country should be stigmatised for detecting and reporting variants," said who epidemiologist maria van kerkhove.
before the new who scheme, some scientists had adopted their own simplified nomenclature for variants such as a february paper using bird names.
however, it was criticised on the grounds that this could imperil birds and by the mother of a girl named 'robin'.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
jerusalem • mr naftali bennett, israel's likely next prime minister, is a self-made tech millionaire who dreams of annexing most of the occupied west bank.
a standard-bearer of israel's religious right and staunch supporter of jewish settlements, mr bennett stormed into national politics in 2013, revamping a pro-settler party and serving as minister for defence as well as for education and the economy in various netanyahu governments.
a former leader of yesha, the main settler movement in the west bank, mr bennett made annexation of parts of the territory that israel captured in a 1967 war a major feature of his political platform.
he has said that the creation of a palestinian state would be suicide for israel, citing security reasons.
the son of american immigrants, mr bennett, 49, is a generation younger than 71-year-old prime minister benjamin netanyahu, israel's longest-serving leader.
a former commando, mr bennett named his eldest son after mr netanyahu's brother, yoni, who was killed in an israeli raid to free hijacked passengers at uganda's entebbe airport in 1976. mr bennett has had a long and often rocky relationship with mr netanyahu, working between 2006 and 2008 as a senior aide to the then opposition leader before leaving on reportedly bad terms.
he was part of mr netanyahu's coalition until it collapsed in 2018.  but he was not asked to join a netanyahu-led unity government in may last year a move seen as an expression of the premier's personal contempt towards him, despite their shared ideology.
born in the israeli city of haifa to immigrants from san francisco, mr bennett is a modern-orthodox religious jew.
he lives with his wife, gilat, a dessert chef, and their four children in the affluent tel aviv suburb of raanana.
like mr netanyahu, mr bennett speaks fluent american-accented english and spent some of his childhood in north america, where his parents were on sabbatical.
while working in the high-tech sector, mr bennett studied law at jerusalem's hebrew university.
in 1999, he formed a start-up and then moved to new york, eventually selling his anti-fraud software company, cyota, to us security firm rsa for us$145 million in 2005. last year, as mr netanyahu's government sought to press ahead with west bank annexation and settlement building in the final months of the trump administration, mr bennett, then defence chief, said: "the building momentum in the country must not be stopped, even for a second.
"the annexation plan was eventually scrapped when israel formalised ties with the united arab emirates.
after israel held its fourth election in two years in march, mr bennett, who leads the far-right yamina party, said a fifth vote would be a national calamity and entered talks with the centre-left block that forms the main opposition to mr netanyahu.
an advocate of liberalising the economy, mr bennett has voiced support for cutting government red tape and taxes.
but he is comparatively liberal on issues such as gay rights and the relationship between religion and the state.
reuters, agence france-pressejoin st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.

                    tuesday, 01 jun 2021
                singapore, june 1 (the straits times/ann): to further reduce the risk of transmission at worksites, the use of antigen rapid tests (art) will now be piloted at construction worksites for those who are not living in dormitories.
these tests, which will generally be conducted once every three days, will be administered by workers through do-it-yourself covid-19 test kits, the building and construction authority (bca) said on monday (may 31).
this comes on top of the polymerase chain reaction (pcr) rostered routine testing that these workers continue to be required to take.
currently, all individuals at construction worksites, whether vaccinated or not, must be tested once every seven days or once every 14 days, depending on their risk level, such as whether they stay in dormitories.
in a circular, the bca said that each employer will appoint trained personnel as supervisors to ensure proper infection prevention controls and the correct use of the test kits.
some worksites will also designate and train specific personnel who administer the swabs for their colleagues, the bca added.
the move to pilot such self-administered tests at worksites comes after prime minister lee hsien loong's announcement on monday that do-it-yourself covid-19 test kits will soon be available at pharmacies here.
these tests, which are simple to use, can be administered by front-line workers on their own, if they wish to test themselves frequently or even daily, pm lee said.
pcr tests are the most accurate, but usually take a day or two for results to be known.
the less accurate art returns results in about 30 minutes and is used heavily for pre-event testing.
the pilot use of such art at worksites is being overseen by the bca, the ministry of health (moh) and the ministry of manpower (mom).
in its circular, the bca said it is currently engaging worksites on the pilot initiative, and that more worksites will be progressively included as singapore ramps up its supply of antigen rapid tests.
more details on the requirements and implementation of the tests will be provided when they are ready, including the necessary training and preparation required, the bca added.
moh said on monday that it will be extending the use of arts further, with pilots in student hostels in autonomous universities.
it will also work with capitaland to run pilots at one or two selected malls for tenants and people who work there.
those whose rapid test returns a positive result will need to take a pcr test at a swab and send home public health preparedness clinic or regional screening centre to confirm if they have covid-19.
they are required to self-isolate until they receive a negative pcr test result.
tags / keywords:
antigen rapid tests
                                                                ,
                                                                                                art
                                                                ,
                                                                                                construction worksites
                                                                ,
                                                                                                covid-19



report it to us.
thank you for your report!copyright © 1995-
            

 star media group berhad (10894d)best viewed on chrome browsers.
{{item['v1 header']}}
   {{item['v1 body']}}

  {{item['v2 header']}}

are you having urinary troubles?
by taking the survey, it is deemed that you consent to the termswe hope you enjoy this feature!
kuala lumpur: duopharma biotech's wholly-owned subsidiary duopharma (m) has signed a deal with malaysia to supply russia's sputnik v covid-19 vaccine.
the company has "concluded execution of separate definitive supply agreements" with the malaysian government and a subsidiary of the russian direct investment fund (rdif) for the supply of 6.
4 million doses of the sputnik v vaccine, bernama reported.
in a filing with bursa malaysia on tuesday, duopharma biotech said the supply of the vaccine is subject to the fulfilment of the remaining conditions under the supply agreements.
these include the approval of the vaccine by the drug control authority of malaysia, as well as other terms and conditions of supply.
group managing director leonard ariff abdul shatar said: "the covid-19 pandemic has presented all malaysians with extraordinary challenges, which we can only overcome through immediate collaboration on many fronts.
"duopharma biotech is fully committed and proud to be part of our nation's inoculation programme.
"sputnik v, developed by russia's gamaleya national research institute of epidemiology and microbiology, has been registered in 68 countries across north and south america, the middle east, europe, asia, and africa.
based on peer-reviewed results of the second interim analysis phase 3, published in the medical journal the lancet, sputnik v's efficacy has been confirmed at 91.
6 per cent.
it is one of only three vaccines in the world with an efficacy rating of more than 90 per cent, and no serious adverse events related to the vaccine were recorded, the group said.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.

                    tuesday, 01 jun 2021
                most children in china undergo private tuition in addition to public schooling.
reutersbeijing (reuters): china's market regulator fined 15 private tutoring firms a combined 36.
5 million yuan ($5.
73 million) for false advertising and pricing frauds, the official people's daily newspaper reported on tuesday (june 1), amid a crackdown on the sector.
the 15 companies include tencent-backed yuanfudao, alibaba-backed zuoyebang, and new oriental education & technology group, the people's daily said, citing a news briefing by the regulator.
the news comes a day after china announced that it will allow couples to have a third child, amid rising concern about a declining fertility rate that many in china blame on the high cost of raising families.
most children in china undergo private tuition in addition to public schooling.
some courses offered by the companies were sold at just one yuan, discounts that masked the eventual full price, the newspaper reported.
the penalised firms included several with u. s.  or hong kong listings, including tal education group, onesmart education group, beststudy education group and scholar education.
tags / keywords:
china
                                                                ,
                                                                                                fine
                                                                ,
                                                                                                educational
                                                                ,
                                                                                                centres



report it to us.
thank you for your report!copyright © 1995-
            

 star media group berhad (10894d)best viewed on chrome browsers.
{{item['v1 header']}}
   {{item['v1 body']}}

  {{item['v2 header']}}

are you having urinary troubles?
by taking the survey, it is deemed that you consent to the termswe hope you enjoy this feature!
singapore: a civil engineering company has been fined s$41,500 for damaging a potable water main, which caused 1.
8 million litres of water to be lost, said pub on tuesday (jun 1).
tong shing contractors was also penalised for carrying out works within a water pipe corridor without pub's prior approval, said the national water agency in a press release.
this is the company's first conviction and the fine was meted out on may 18. the contractor was carrying out pipe jacking works across admiralty road west on dec 22, 2018 as part of road-widening and infrastructure works.
according to pub, the head of the pipe-jacking machine struck a water main with a diameter of 700mm at a depth of about 3.
7m below the road surface and punctured it.
"the leak resulted in the loss of 1.
8 million litres of potable water, enough to fill about two-thirds of an olympic-sized swimming pool," said the agency.
"as a result of the incident, three traffic lanes at admiralty road west near the junction of dahan road were also affected.
"after being alerted to the incident, the agency isolated the leak and carried out repair works, "which uncovered a hole of about 300mm on the water main".
"investigations revealed that tong shing did not carry out adequate site verification works to physically ascertain the exact location and alignment of the affected water main before commencement of works," pub added.
tong shing also proceeded with pipe jacking works without submitting a plan for pub's approval as required and "failed to take all reasonable precautions to minimise the risk of damage", the agency said.
pub said it takes "a serious view" of water main damage resulting in wastage, which can be prevented with "due diligence".
"contractors should always refer to pub's advisory on the prevention of damage to water pipe infrastructure before carrying out any construction works.
they must exercise caution when carrying out works near water mains and ensure that adequate measures are in place to prevent damage.
"under the public utilities act, the penalty for damaging a water main or connecting pipe with a diameter of 300mm or more is a fine of up to s$200,000, up to three years in jail or both.
contractors who carry out works in the vicinity of water mains without an approved plan may be fined up to s$10,000.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
there are ample supplies of food and essential items but people should buy only what they need, said trade and industry minister gan kim yong yesterday.
during a virtual press conference, he said singapore is working with malaysia to ensure the continued flow of essential supplies between the two countries as malaysia imposes a two-week lockdown from today till june 14. mr gan, who co-chairs the multi-ministry task force on covid-19, said the government has been working with relevant agencies and companies to build up singapore's existing stockpile and further diversify its sources of food and essential items, while also increasing local production.
the economic agencies are also working with firms especially those dealing with essential goods and services to minimise disruption to their supply lines, he added.
"as the pandemic continues to evolve globally, we must remain prepared and vigilant as a nation, while staying flexible and adaptable," mr gan said.
he noted the overall impact of phase two (heightened alert) measures on singapore's gross domestic product is expected to be modest, with the effects to differ across various sectors.
domestic consumer-oriented sectors, such as food and beverage services, retail, and land transport will be harder hit, while the impact on more outward-oriented sectors such as manufacturing and finance is likely to be less severe.
on saturday, mr gan visitedfairprice's distribution centre in joo koon and a cold warehouse at local logistics firm ych's supply chain city to better understand the measures put in place to ensure sufficient food and essential supplies for all.
singapore imports an array of products from malaysia, including food items such as chicken and vegetables.
malaysia's lockdown means that only essential economic sectors will be allowed to operate.
the country saw new highs in covid-19 infections and deaths last month.
this article first appeared in the straits times.
get the new paper on your phone with the free tnp app.
download from the apple app store or google play store now
subtotalcalculating.
.
.
coupon (free50)s$0.
00shipping chargecalculating.
.
.
subtotal (excluding taxes)calculating.
.
.
gstcalculating.
.
.
order totalcalculating.
.
.
download our mobile app to bring our news with you on the go.
check your email for more details.
do you want to customise your notebook now?
want our latest singapore corporate news stories for
                      
                      free
                      

                    follow our telegram, facebook for the latest updates round the clock
                thank you!please check your email inbox to confirm your newsletter subscription.
unlimited access to all stories from $99.
9/year*the latest reporting and analysis from business and investments to news and views on social issues.
bonus:
end of contentno more pages to loadmay 31, 2021may 28, 2021may 30, 2021may 31, 2021may 31, 2021
               want our latest singapore corporate news stories for 
               free
               

                    follow our telegram, facebook for the latest updates round the clock
                thank you!please check your email inbox to confirm your newsletter subscription.
follow us© all rights reserved.
2021. the edge publishing pte ltd.
singapore: a total of 2,825 singapore armed forces (saf) recruits from the 02/21 basic military training (bmt) batch graduated about a week earlier on may 26 as part of covid-19 preventive measures.
"in response to the national covid-19 situation, the singapore armed forces had earlier introduced further measures to safeguard the safety and well-being of our servicemen," the ministry of defence (mindef) said on tuesday (jun 1) in response to queries from cna.
"they (the recruits who graduated early) were also directed to strictly observe the national guidelines and only go out for essential activities while at home.
"the 02/21 batch enlisted on apr 3, apr 4 and apr 5 had completed their basic trainfire package, combat circuit and close quarter battle exercises, said the basic military training centre on its facebook page.
according to the singapore army website, the final two weeks of the nine-week bmt is when "recruits will have completed all the essential training requirements, and transformed from civilians into proud, confident soldiers".
the recruits were given the first dose of the covid-19 vaccine before going home and will get their second dose when they are posted to new units.
mindef had announced on may 18 that the saf will defer non-essential in-camp training and suspend the conduct of individual physical proficiency tests until jun 13 as part of national covid-19 measures under phase 2 (heightened alert).
however, mindef said that key activities critical for the build-up of operational units, like bmt, will continue with stringent safe management measures in place.
this includes swabbing recruits who enlist in may, as well as their trainers.
last year, the saf suspended bmt from apr 7 to may 4, in line with nationwide covid-19 measures amid a rise in community cases.
a total of 3,400 recruits were instructed to strictly observe the national guidelines of the "circuit breaker" period and were provided with home-based instructional material on basic skills and fitness development.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore: a 32-year-old man has been arrested under the official secrets act (osa) for allegedly leaking information aboutcovid-19 measures for sport and physical activitiesto a whatsapp chat group.
the police said they received a report may 18 that information about the suspension of sport, physical activity classes and programmes catering to children and youth aged 18 years and below from may 19 until jun 13 had been leaked to the public.
this occurred before the information was officially released by sport singapore, the police said in a news release on sunday (may 30).
"preliminary investigations revealed that the man, who is a public servant and an authorised recipient of the safe management measures for sport and physical activities, had allegedly shared the information via whatsapp on may 16 with members of a private whatsapp chat group who were not authorised to receive the classified information," said the police.
the information was further disseminated by other members from the chat group, resulting in the wider circulation of the classified information before it was officially released.
since the start of the pandemic, at least six people have been charged under the osa for unauthorised or wrongful communication of information.
in may, ahousing and development board officerwas among two men charged over unauthorised communication of information about flat inspections.
kalayarasan karuppaya, a higher estate executive with hdb at the time of the offences, had allegedly leaked information on hdb's impending inspections of a flat at kim tian road to damandeep singh, a registered tenant of the unit.
kalayarasan was not authorised to communicate the information to damandeep, but allegedly did so on three occasions in may, august and september 2019. chua wee lin, who at the time held the position of deputy director at the national library board's property and facilities management department, was also charged in may with sending information about phase 2 reopening measures to a whatsapp chat group with 18 other members in it.
in april,a couple was chargedwith leaking an unreleased statement about school closures during the covid-19 "circuit breaker" last year.
noorain jubli, who was the personal assistant to the sfa director-general at the time of the offences, was charged with two counts of wrongful communication of information.
sfa suspended her from her duties in april 2020. her husband khairul annuar zakaria was also given two charges under the osa for wrongful communication and soliciting information.
that same month,zhao zheng, then deputy lead of moh's data management unit, was given more than 20 charges after she allegedly leaked the daily covid-19 case numbers before they were officially released to a private group chat on 22 occasions in 2020. those found guilty of wrongful communication of information under the osa face a fine of up to s$2,000 and up to two years' jail.
the police said unauthorised recipients should delete and not further circulate any confidential information received, as they may otherwise be similarly liable under the official secrets act.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore a public servant has been arrested for allegedly leaking details about the suspension of activities for children and youth under covid-19 safe management measures before they were officially released.
the 32-year-old man was arrested on may 19 for wrongful communication of information under the official secrets act, the police said in a statement on sunday (may 30).
the police said they received a report on may 18 that information pertaining to the suspension of sport, physical activity classes and programmes for children and youth aged 18 and below from may 19 to june 13 had been leaked to the public.
the information was circulating via whatsapp before sport singapore's announcement on may 18. the man, who is a public servant and an authorised recipient of the safe management measures for sport and physical activities, allegedly shared the information via the messaging app on may 16 with members of a private chat group.
the recipients were not authorised to receive the classified information.
the information was subsequently further disseminated from that chat group, resulting in wider circulation of the message.
police investigations are ongoing.
the offence of wrongful communication of information carries with it a fine of up to $2,000 and imprisonment for up to two years.
the police have warned that unauthorised recipients should not further circulate confidential information received, as they may be similarly liable under the official secrets act.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore: three primary schools in punggol have begun tapping on electricity generated from solar panels as singapore moves towards its target for at least 20 per cent of schools to be carbon-neutral by 2030. rooftop solar systems were installed at horizon primary school, compassvale primary school and edgefield primary school at the end of april, said sunseap group on tuesday (jun 1).
the systems will generate 397.
44 kilowatts peak (kwp), 190.
44 kwp and 389.
16 kwp of energy respectively – enough to power 297 four-room flats when combined, said the local solar energy solutions provider.
sunseap said it was also installing solar panels at six other schools: anderson primary school, kranji secondary school, catholic high school (primary), methodist girls' school (primary and secondary) and tampines primary school.
earlier this year, the ministry of education (moe) said progressively equipping schools with solar panels was one way it planned to reach the 2030 carbon-neutral target.
the target was first announced in february with the launch of thesingapore green plan.
moe also said it was working towards a two-thirds reduction of net carbon emissions from the schools sector by 2030. as of march, about 130 schools were on the solarnova programme with solar panels progressively installed on their rooftops.
then minister for education lawrence wong told parliament that moe will extend the programme to cover most of the remaining schools in the coming decade.
the school installations carried out by sunseap were part of the fourth solar leasing tender awarded to the company under the solarnova programme in 2019.  the company said it is set to install more than 170,000 solar panels across public housing blocks and government sites between 2020 and 2022.
"sustainability has become increasingly important and there is no better place to instil environmental consciousness in future generations than through schools," said sunseap co-founder and ceo frank phuan.
singapore has set anational targetof halving its 2030 peak greenhouse gas emissions by 2050, and achieving net-zero emissions "as soon as viable" in the second half of the century.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
myanmar's military used artillery and helicopters on monday (may 31) against anti-junta militias in the country's east, witnesses and rebels said, forcing residents to flee and join thousands of others displaced by recent fighting in the region.
residents of kayah state bordering thailand said the military was firing artillery from positions inside the state capital loikaw into demoso, about 14.
5 km (9 miles) away, where a people's defence force said it had attacked troops and was coming under heavy fire.
myanmar's military is fighting on multiple fronts and struggling to impose order since its feb.  1 coup against aung san suu kyi and her elected government, sparking nationwide protests and paralysing strikes.
decades-old conflicts between the military and ethnic minority armies have also reignited, while militias allied with a shadow government have stepped up attacks on the army, which has responded with heavy weapons and air strikes, forcing thousands to flee.
"their cannons are visible to us, too.
i can see their artillery fire in the sky.
almost 50 times.
the sound of artillery is deafening us," a resident of loikaw told reuters, requesting anonymity due to safety concerns.
on its facebook page, the karenni people's defence force, a militia active throughout kayah state, said it was engaged in clashes with the military, which had deployed two helicopter gunships to carry out air strikes on monday evening.
reuters was unable to reach the defence force, and a spokesman for the ruling military council did not answer calls seeking comment.
fighting in kayah state has displaced about 37,000 people in southeast myanmar in recent weeks, according to the united nations.
many have fled into jungles and are in need of food and medicine.
civilian forces, many with rudimentary rifles and limited training, have been formed in several towns and regions of myanmar to challenge the military, in support of a national unity government that the junta says is treasonous.
read more[[nid:530154]]it has designated the nug and the people's defence force as terrorist groups, a label it has used for many of the pro-democracy groups.
more than 800 civilians have been killed since the coup, according to figures cited by the united nations.
junta chief min aung hlaing has said the toll was nearer 300, and has said it is unlikely there will be a civil war in myanmar.
late on monday, the demoso town defence force said on its facebook page that all troops had been killed and it had suffered one casualty.
reuters could not independently verify the information.
a resident of demoso, who asked not to be identified, said that much of the town's population fled the bombardment.
"all of the residents have already gone to the forest," the resident said.
singapore: motorists who commit traffic offences in silver zones and school zones will face higher fines and additional demerit points from jul 1, the ministry of home affairs said on tuesday (jun 1).
fines will be increased by s$100 while an additional two demerit points will be incurred for specified offences committed in these zones.
these include offences committed at pedestrian crossings, such as failing to slow down or give way when approaching crossings, and offences related to driving behaviour that endanger pedestrian safety, such as speeding or driving against the flow of traffic.
first announcedby minister of state for home affairs desmond tan on mar 1, the move aims to make roads safer for elderly pedestrians as well as students by strengthening deterrence against irresponsible driving.
in a media release, mha said: "elderly pedestrians continue to account for a disproportionate number of traffic accidents resulting in pedestrian fatalities in 2020, the elderly made up more than 80 per cent of pedestrian fatalities.
"while jaywalking by elderly pedestrians contributed to some of these accidents, many accidents also arise from irresponsible driving behaviour on the motorist's part, such as failing to slow down when approaching a pedestrian crossing.
"the situation may be improved with greater care on the part of motorists.
"the number of traffic accidents resulting in elderly pedestrian casualties increased from 223 in 2015 to 317 in 2019.  this number declined to 233 in 2020, however, the decrease may have been a result of reduced road and pedestrian traffic due to the covid-19 pandemic, mha said.
silver zones, introduced in 2014, are located in areas with a large population of senior citizens.
these zones typically have a lower speed limit of 40kmh and additional traffic-calming and senior-friendly road safety features, such as additional crossing points and narrower lanes to slow down traffic.
school zones, which are demarcated areas fronting schools, also have enhanced road safety features, with a reduced speed limit of 40kmh during three time blocks on school days and whenever school events are in progress.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
myanmar protesters took to the streets on tuesday (jun 1) in several districts, as fighting between the army and anti-junta militias raged in border areas, four months after the military ousted an elected government in a coup.
myanmar's military is still struggling to impose order after arresting aung san suu kyi and senior leaders of her party, sparking nationwide protests and paralysing strikes.
in the far south of myanmar, anti-military protesters staged a march in laung lone, a photograph posted by the irrawaddy newspaper on social media showed.
meanwhile, in the commercial hub of yangon a group of mainly young protesters rallied in the district of kamayut, photographs posted by the myanmar now news portal showed.
"this is not over yet.
we still have our turn," read a sign written on a sheet carried by one protester.
demonstrators in urban areas have had to become more nimble to avoid security forces, often using flash mobs or staging small unannounced protests, after larger rallies in the first months after the coup were often met with security forces firing live rounds.
decades-old conflicts between the military and ethnic minority armies in border areas have also reignited since the coup.
ethnic militias allied with a shadow civilian government have stepped up attacks on the army, which has responded with heavy weapons and air strikes, forcing thousands to flee.
mobile phone footage obtained from a resident in kayah state bordering thailand showed what appeared to be artillery being fired from inside the state capital loikaw into demoso, about 14.
5km away, where a people's defence force said it had attacked troops and was coming under heavy fire.
residents in loikaw said that about 50 rounds had been fired on monday and six on tuesday morning.
"the sound of artillery is deafening us," a resident told reuters on monday, requesting anonymity due to safety concerns.
the karenni nationalities defence force, a militia active in kayah state, said in a post on its facebook page that 80 army soldiers had been killed on monday, while one of its fighters and a civilian were also casualties.
reuters could not verify the claim and a spokesman for the junta did not answer calls seeking comment.
fighting in kayah has displaced about 37,000 people in recent weeks, according to the united nations.
many have fled into jungles and are in need of food and medicine.
civilian forces, often armed with rudimentary rifles and limited training, have been formed in towns and regions across myanmar to challenge the military, in support of a national unity government that the junta says is treasonous.
security forces have killed 840 people since the coup, according to figures provided by an activist group.
junta chief min aung hlaing has said the toll was nearer 300, and has said it is unlikely there will be a civil war in myanmar.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
kuala lumpur: duopharma biotech's wholly-owned subsidiary duopharma (m) has signed a deal with malaysia to supply russia's sputnik v covid-19 vaccine.
the company has "concluded execution of separate definitive supply agreements" with the malaysian government and a subsidiary of the russian direct investment fund (rdif) for the supply of 6.
4 million doses of the sputnik v vaccine, bernama reported.
in a filing with bursa malaysia on tuesday, duopharma biotech said the supply of the vaccine is subject to the fulfilment of the remaining conditions under the supply agreements.
these include the approval of the vaccine by the drug control authority of malaysia, as well as other terms and conditions of supply.
group managing director leonard ariff abdul shatar said: "the covid-19 pandemic has presented all malaysians with extraordinary challenges, which we can only overcome through immediate collaboration on many fronts.
"duopharma biotech is fully committed and proud to be part of our nation's inoculation programme.
"sputnik v, developed by russia's gamaleya national research institute of epidemiology and microbiology, has been registered in 68 countries across north and south america, the middle east, europe, asia, and africa.
based on peer-reviewed results of the second interim analysis phase 3, published in the medical journal the lancet, sputnik v's efficacy has been confirmed at 91.
6 per cent.
it is one of only three vaccines in the world with an efficacy rating of more than 90 per cent, and no serious adverse events related to the vaccine were recorded, the group said.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.

                    tuesday, 01 jun 2021
                there has been no engagement between national covid-19 immunisation programme coordinating minister khairy jamaluddin and the private general practitioners (gps) on the involvement of private gps in the national immunisation programme's (nip) phase 2 and 3.  the malaysian medical association (mma) had officially written to the minister on march 2 to meet on plans for private gps to be involved in the nip but there had been no reply from yb's office.
no official communication from the jkjav even up until now.
the minister had shown no interest in engaging the gps.
why are there only 2,500 gps registered for the nip?the minister should have come down from his high horse to meet with us months ago when we wrote to him.
perhaps that would have encouraged more gps to get on board.
what a difference it would have made if he showed some interest.
the nip coordinating minister has a zoom session with the media every other day.
why hasn't he had a zoom session with the 8,000 gps in the country?
perhaps that could have made all the difference.
only now when cases of covid-19 and deaths have skyrocketed, there is talk of gps.
where was moh and jkjav months ago?
or are we keeping to tradition in waiting for things to get worse before something is done?by the end of april, most of the 2,500 private gps had already received training and were ready to begin vaccinating in early may the timeline targeted to begin the programme, but it was left hanging.
the gps have been waiting for the go-ahead from the government.
was the nip coordinating minister aware of this?
if he was, why the delay?even with 2,500 gps, 75,000 vaccinations could be carried out per day.
i am sure the minister is well aware of this as it has been widely publicised.
if he is indeed aware, then as the minister in charge of the nip, he should be bugging the gps night and day if the programme was not moving along, knowing they are the best, easiest option, and most readily available resource to carry out vaccinations as proven in other countries.
and by the way, all private gps were trained by the health ministry of malaysia.
every day, the minister is getting bombarded with questions on the slow progress of the nip.
shouldn't he be engaging the private gps, who can instantly double or triple the vaccination rate?for months, there have been calls for private healthcare participation in the nip, but the government has been dragging their feet.
a good leader is one who has his finger on the pulse of the rakyat and understands their needs.
as can clearly be seen now, many members of the public prefer to go to their good ol' private gp down the road to get their jabs.
as a minister serving the people, he should do all he can to make that happen as quickly as possible.
one of the main reasons why the government of the day, after 3 mcos, has failed to bring the covid-19 situation under control is its failure to listen.
there is a lot of talk from them, but no listening.
policies are decided in silos, with hardly any engagement with stakeholders.
this has been the story since day one of the pandemic.
how can there be any hope of success in managing the pandemic when the government is keeping to themselves and even turning away help?
in this case, private gps have not been consulted even when the vaccination programme involves them!lastly, on the training required for vaccinations, it is mostly on cold chain requirements for the vaccine storage and on administrative procedures.
nothing really technical or scientific.
the training is done online and it takes only 2-3 hours to complete.
even using the "special" syringe is not complicated.
they should trust the doctor to know how to handle one.
if at all, the minister is aware that there is too much red tape in the way of the programme with private clinics, then as the nip coordinating minister, he should do something about it.
we only want things to work because like the minister as well as all malaysians, we too, want the nip to be a great success so that the country can recover from this nightmare of a pandemic as quickly as possible.
prof datuk dr subramaniam muniandy, presidentmalaysian medical association related stories:only about 2,500 gps signed up to be part of covid-19 vaccination process, says khairygp clinics to be roped in for jabs



report it to us.
thank you for your report!copyright © 1995-
            

 star media group berhad (10894d)best viewed on chrome browsers.
{{item['v1 header']}}
   {{item['v1 body']}}

  {{item['v2 header']}}

are you having urinary troubles?
by taking the survey, it is deemed that you consent to the termswe hope you enjoy this feature!
global times reporter on society, cybersecurity, diplomatic relations and topics related to xinjiang.
photo:xinhuaeast china's jiangsu province has reported the world's first case of a human infected with h10n3 avian influenza.
china's health authorities said on tuesday that it was an occasional poultry-to-human transmission, and the risk of a large-scale spread is extremely low.
the patient is a 41-year-old man from zhenjiang, a city in jiangsu province.
the man had a fever and other symptoms on april 23 and was admitted to a local medical institute for treatment on april 28, according to a notice released by china's national health commission on tuesday.
the entire genetic analysis of the virus obtained from the patient showed that he tested positive for the h10n3 virus, making him the first human case of h10n3.
the entire genetic analysis of the virus showed that the h10n3 virus was of avian origin and did not have the ability to effectively infect humans, experts summoned by nhc believed.
"no human cases of h10n3 have been reported in the world, and the h10n3 virus among poultry is low pathogenic.
this case is an occasional poultry-to-human cross-species transmission, and the risk of a large-scale spread is extremely low," nhc said.
h10n3 is a subtype of the influenza a virus, also known as the bird flu virus.
h10n3 is normally lethal to wild birds and poultry, as it can spread through respiratory droplets among the animals, just like the flu and covid-19, said yang zhanqiu, a deputy director of the pathogen biology department at wuhan university.
it is unknown how this person became infected, but he likely got infected from respiratory droplets of poultry or direct contact with sick live poultry, yang said.
it presents a low risk to humans and there is no evidence to indicate that h10n3 virus can cause human-to-human transmission, yang said, adding that we should not overreact to the case, and more monitoring should be carried out to see how it spreads.
cases of humans infected with other types of avian influenza are common.
russia confirmed the first case of human infection with the avian influenza a(h5n8) virus in the world in february, xinhua news agency reported.
central china's hunan province confirmed a human infection case of the h5n6 bird flu virus in december 2020. among the various types of avian influenza, yang said the h5n1 type is highly pathogenic, with a fatality rate of between 40 and 50 percent.
the nhc has instructed jiangsu to carry out relevant epidemic prevention and control measures.
all close contacts of the patient have been put under medical observation.
local authorities have conducted emergency monitoring, with no abnormalities found so far.
the patient's condition is currently stable and is ready to be discharged from hospital, nhc announcement said.
nhc warned the public to avoid contact with sick or dead poultry and to try to avoid direct contact with live poultry.
the h5n8 strain of bird flu has been detected in seven workers at a poultry farm in russia, .
.
.
paris: japan's naomi osaka stunned the tennis world on monday (may 31) by withdrawing from the french open after deciding to boycott post-match media duties, explaining she had been suffering from depression for almost three years.
osaka said in the build-up to the tournament that she would not attend the obligatory press conferences for players after matches, saying the questioning by journalists stresses her mental health.
the four-time grand slam champion made good on her threat on sunday when, after winning her first round match, she did not hold a press conference.
she was fined us$15,000 by the roland garros referee, and grand slam organisers later issued a strongly worded statement warning of possible expulsion from the french open and future majors if she failed to change her stance.
on monday, the world no 2 decided to take matters into her own hands to end the stand-off.
"this isn't a situation i ever imagined or intended when i posted a few days ago," the 23-year-old osaka said on twitter.
"i think now the best thing for the tournament, the other players and my well-being is that i withdraw so that everyone can get back to focusing on the tennis going on in paris.
"i never wanted to be a distraction and i accept that my timing was not ideal and my message could have been clearer.
"osaka, one of the biggest names in women's sport, went on to say she had suffered from depression since 2018.
"the truth is that i have suffered long bouts of depression since the u. s.  open in 2018 and i have had a really hard time coping with that," she said.
"anyone that knows me knows i'm introverted, and anyone that has seen me at the tournaments will notice that i'm often wearing headphones as that helps dull my social anxiety.
"the french tennis federation (fft), organisers of the tournament, called her withdrawal "unfortunate.
""we are sorry and sad for naomi osaka.
.
.
we wish her the best and quickest possible recovery, and we look forward to having naomi at our tournament next year," fft president gilles moretton said in a statement.
he said the major tennis bodies were committed to athletes' wellbeing and improving their tournament experience including their interaction with the media.
the women's tennis association (wta) said mental health was one of the highest priorities of the organisation.
"we remain here to support and assist naomi in any way possible and we hope to see her back on the court soon," it said in a statement.
after beating serena williams to claim her first major at the 2018 us open, osaka was booed by the crowd during the presentation ceremony as her victory was overshadowed by the american's outburst following a row with the umpire.
osaka said that since then, she has struggled in the spotlight.
on monday, said she suffers "huge waves of anxiety" before speaking to the world's media.
american sofia kenin, who won the australian open and finished runner-up at roland garros last year, said dealing with the media demands of elite tennis was "definitely not easy" but it is what players "signed up for.
""there's expectations from the outside, sponsors and everyone.
you just have to somehow manage it.
you have to have a good team around you who support you," the american said.
osaka added that she would take some time away from tennis and hoped later to meet the sport's organisers to improve the system.
"i wrote privately to the tournament apologising and saying that i would be more than happy to speak with them after the tournament as the slams are intense," osaka said.
"i'm gonna take some time away from the court now, but when the time is right, i really want to work with the tour to discuss ways we can make things better for the players, press and fans.
"it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
hong kong (bloomberg) hong kong is allowing vaccinated directors and senior executives of major listed companies to travel globally more easily, in a significant relaxation of its onerous border curbs that is drawing backlash from the wider population for being elitist.
vaccinated senior executives from about 500 companies included in indexes like the hang seng and hang seng china enterprises can seek permission to travel in and out of the city without needing to follow the current quarantine requirement, hong kong's financial services and the treasury bureau said in an e-mailed statement on monday (may 31).
the clarification of a wider policy of exemption for vaccinated executives comes in the wake of a friday announcement that some vaccinated senior bankers can skip quarantine.
however, the move is likely to deepen public ire over the special treatment, as hong kong's traveller quarantine requirements are some of the strictest in the world and require people to pay for hotel room stays – the supply of which is rapidly drying up for the summer months.
the current rules stipulate that everyone arriving in hong kong from outside china must isolate in a hotel for up to 21 days.
pressure is building on the government to drastically relax quarantine and other social restrictions for vaccinated people as incentives to re-open borders and to boost hong kong's low vaccination rate.
"it's a step in the right direction.
is that enough?
we believe it is by far not enough," said mr frederick gollob, chairman of the european chamber of commerce in hong kong.
"with the combination of vaccination and ongoing testing, the hong kong government should further, on a broader scale, reduce the quarantine requirement on the way to reopening the city.
"the latest quarantine exemption is available to other firms from financial industries like banking, mobile payments, insurance, securities and futures intermediaries.
companies are allowed a limited quota of exemptions, and the government will review applications based on criteria like where the executive is travelling from.
the executives must undergo testing and are required to stick to pre-approved itineraries.
an earlier version of the quarantine exemption policy has existed since last year for executives coming from mainland china.
singapore, asia's other major financial hub, does not grant exemptions from travel quarantine for business executives.
banks lauded the new announcement.
"we welcome the new measure providing more convenience to vaccinated senior executives when traveling to hong kong.
this helps encourage resumption of necessary business travel and brings business activities gradually back to normal, which is particularly important to hong kong as an international financial centre," said a standard chartered plc spokeswoman in an emailed statement.
hsbc holdings plc said in a statement, "while the pandemic has showed how much could be accomplished virtually, a measured approach to facilitate business travels to and from hong kong could help stimulate more economic activities across a range of sectors. "
even within the business community however, some think that the exemptions are not being rolled out widely enough.
the american chamber of commerce, for example, said that the exemption should be "extended across sectors.
""all businesses have suffered, and all are keen to get safely back on the road again," said the chamber's president tara joseph in a statement.
however, the government has not signalled that it plans to significantly relax social-distancing rules for vaccinated people, such as mandatory outdoor masking, citing the low vaccination uptake.
some medical experts also continue to recommend social restriction remain in place in order to prevent another wave of covid-19, particularly as the vaccination rate is low, though local infection numbers have hovered at or near zero for weeks.
some critics argue, however, that it's precisely the lack of privileges for vaccinated people is keeping the inoculation rate depressed just 13.
4 per cent of hong kong's population of 7.
5 million has been fully inoculated, according to bloomberg's covid-19 vaccine tracker far behind other finance centres like london and singapore.
now that the door has been open for quarantine exemption for some vaccinated people, the policy should be expanded to all fully inoculated people, said professor ben cowling from the school of public health at the university of hong kong.
exemption is "an evidence-based measure given that vaccinated people are substantially less likely to be infected.
such a measure could also encourage greater vaccination uptake," he said.
the government has instead been leaning on businesses and institutions to encourage injections.
still, the special treatment meted out to a small elite of executives is likely to further stoke public anger, already at high levels following more than a year of strict social restrictions and quarantine policies that have seen thousands forced from their homes to isolate in government-run camps.
the continuing quarantine policies for travellers also means that as vaccinated people in the us and european countries plan their summer travel, almost no one will be able to travel into hong kong without shouldering the prohibitive time and cost of quarantine.
ally, a hong kong citizen who currently lives in canada, said she is extremely upset that "as long as you are rich and powerful" you can skip the requirements that most people must observe.
ally, who asked that only her english name be used, said she has been unable to return to hong kong after her father died last year.
a single mother, she cannot afford the cost of a 21-day quarantine, which would require her to be away from work without pay.
"you can imagine how infuriating it is that someone else is exempt because of money and i have lost my only remaining parent," she said.
the issue is not just the time and cost of quarantine.
as the length of hotel isolation for those travelling from some countries, including the us, has dropped to two weeks for vaccinated people, demand for rooms has skyrocketed.
numerous accommodations, especially those at lower price points, are fully booked through the end of the current quarantine period, which runs until june 19. the food and health bureau said monday in an e-mailed statement that the supply of rooms would be increased from the current 8,300 to 10,000 due to more demand.
some hotels will open up more rooms for booking, it said.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
geneva (reuters) the world health organisation (who) has approved a covid-19 vaccine made by sinovac biotech for emergency-use listing, the second chinese-produced shot to get its endorsement, a who statement said on tuesday (june 1).
who emergency listing is a signal to national regulators on a product's safety and efficacy.
it would also allow the shot to be included in covax, the global programme to provide vaccines mainly for poor countries, which currently faces major supply problems due to india's suspension of vaccine exports.
in a statement, the independent panel of experts said it recommended sinovac's vaccine for people over 18, with a second dose two to four weeks later.
there was no upper-age limit as data suggested it is likely to have a protective effect on older people.
the who's technical advisory group, which began meeting on may 5, took the decision after reviewing the latest clinical data on the sinovac vaccine's safety and efficacy, as well as the company's manufacturing practices.
branded coronavac in some regions, it is the second chinese developed vaccine to win such who listing to combat covid-19, after the may 7 approval of a shot developed by state-backed sinopharm.
a third chinese vaccine, produced by cansino biologics, has submitted clinical trial data, but no who review has been scheduled.
sinovac said that it had supplied more than 600 million doses of its vaccine at home and abroad as of the end of last month and over 430 million doses have been administered.
vaccine efficacy results showed that the vaccine prevented symptomatic disease in 51 per cent of those vaccinated and prevented severe covid-19 and hospitalisation in 100 per cent of the studied population, the who said.
the who's separate strategic advisory group of experts (sage) had said previously in a review document that vaccine efficacy in multi-country phase three clinical trials ranged from 51 per cent to 84 per cent.
indonesia's health ministry said on may 12 that its study of 120,000 healthcare workers who had received the vaccine found it was 94 per cent effective at preventing symptomatic disease.
in a preliminary evaluation, the sage panel found that the shot was efficacious in preventing covid-19 in adults under 60, but that some quality data on the risk of serious adverse effects was lacking.
it cited evidence gaps in safety in pregnancy, and on safety and clinical protection in older adults, those with underlying disease and evaluation of rare adverse events detected through post-authorisation safety monitoring.
the sage experts, who issue policy recommendations to states and dosage guidelines, reviewed sinovac clinical data last month.
china has already deployed hundreds of millions of doses of both sinopharm and sinovac vaccines at home and exported them to many countries, particularly in latin america, asia and africa.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
(bloomberg) -- china is escalating a crackdown on its online education sector, forcing once high-flying startups to mothball plans for multi-billion-dollar initial public offerings this year.
just months ago, edtech outfits were one of the hottest investments in china's post-covid internet industry, pulling in more than $10 billion of venture funding last year from powerhouses like alibaba group holding ltd. , tencent holdings ltd.  and softbank group corp.  then beijing stepped in.
president xi jinping suggested in march the surge in after-school tutoring was putting immense pressure on on china's kids, signaling a personal interest in curbing excesses.
that led to warnings in state-owned media and penalties aimed at predatory practices that play on a nation's obsession with academic achievement.
now, the country's education ministry plans to create a dedicated division to oversee all private education platforms for the first time, according to people familiar with the matter.
the government campaign has brought several potential mega-ipos to a screeching halt.
tencent-backed vipkid and huohua siwei have put off u. s.  listings despite working in concert with banks for months, the people said.
alibaba-invested zuoyebang will likely miss its target of debuting as soon as this year, one of them said.
and tencent-backed rival yuanfudao -- at $15.
5 billion the most valuable of the lot -- isn't going to kick off ipo preparations anytime soon, they said, asking to be identified talking about internal matters.
beijing is zeroing in on tutoring startups that thrived when schools sent students home, then launched a marketing free-for-all regulators say is funneling millions of kids into mind-numbing virtual classes with uncertain benefits.
their concern centers not just on reckless pricing or advertising but also on the widening divide between the haves and have-nots -- those who can afford to load up on extra lessons.
to that end, officials laid out a plethora of restrictions this month including limiting the after-school tuition fees companies can charge, and fined yuanfudao and zuoyebang for false advertising claims.
chinese media have reported more in the offing, from bans on online courses for kids six years old or younger to restrictions on homework and mandatory licensing for all teachers.
reuters reported that new polices could include a moratorium on weekend classes, which account for more than a third of private tuition in the country according to bloomberg intelligence.
"this could decimate revenue throughout the industry," bloomberg intelligence analyst catherine lim said, referring to a blanket weekend ban.
yuanfudao declined to comment, while zuoyebang and huohua siwei didn't respond to requests for comment.
a spokesman for vipkid declined to comment on any ipo plans, but said the company is following updates in the education sector closely.
read more: edtech startup zuoyebang said to weigh $500 million u. s.  ipostay-at-home tutoring was growing in popularity around the world -- particularly in asia -- even before covid 19 scrapped in-person classes.
but it's in china that the industry has taken on a life of its own.
on any given day, at least 50 million students -- the equivalent of the entire population of spain -- could use zuoyebang's platform, the company has claimed.
that sheer scale is why the country's online education startups have become some of the world's most valuable after attracting $10.
5 billion of funding last year, more than was raised in total over the previous three years, according to research firm preqin.
china's online learning market was expected to reach 315 billion yuan ($49.
5 billion) in 2020, almost triple from five years ago, according to global market data tracker statista.
it also helps explain why xi's administration is taking unusually direct steps to influence the industry's evolution in china.
his government in general is keen to curtail the growing influence of internet giants like tencent and alibaba, among the industry's biggest backers, through a series of regulatory probes and record fines.
officials are also concerned about hundreds of millions of parents plowing their savings into online classes, while subjecting children to increasingly onerous workloads.
as with past booms built on shaky ground -- say, in peer-to-peer lending or improperly licensed wealth management products -- beijing stepped in quickly to defuse what it perceived to be a potential ticking time bomb.
the fallout was swift.
gsx techedu inc. , new oriental education & technology group inc.  and tal education group -- which mainly operate physical schools but serve as barometers of industry sentiment -- have shed $55 billion of value since the start of march.
investors from softbank and sequoia to hillhouse capital and tiger global, among the biggest proselytizers of past years, have been sideswiped by the ferocity of the regulatory clampdown and have in many cases been forced to pull back from lucrative exits.
on monday, gsx said it is shutting its pre-school education business for children aged 3 to 8 and cutting staff.
china decided to ban kindergarten and private-tutoring schools from teaching the elementary-school curriculum from june 1, a spokeswoman said.
others however remain unfazed for now.
zhangmen education inc. , which filed for a u. s.  ipo on may 19, plans to test investors' confidence despite the regulatory uncertainties.
the e-learning upstart backed by warburg pincus and softbank has yet to pull back on a listing plan, according to one person with knowledge of the matter.
and on may 25, jiayi, a beijing firm operating both online and offline tutoring centers, also filed for an ipo in hong kong.
both however cite intensifying competition and new regulatory requirements among their risk factors.
zhangmen didn't immediately provide comment.
that fierce rivalry comes through in unexpected -- occasionally ominous -- ways.
in january, a social media furor erupted after companies including yuanfudao, zuoyebang and bytedance ltd. 's education unit hired the same actress to pose as a teacher on their platforms, local media reported.
the same bespectacled woman presented herself as english and math teachers in different promotion material.
in one of the promo videos posted online, she took direct aim at parental paranoia -- precisely what regulators railed against.
the actress, flogging a 33-hour live-streaming course package that cost just $8, warned that missing out has consequences.
"it could be parents themselves who ruin their kids," she said.
read more: alibaba-backed edtech startup hires cfo ahead of likely u. s.  ipo(updates with gsx changes in 15th paragraph)more stories like this are available on bloomberg.
comsubscribe now to stay ahead with the most trusted business news source.
©2021 bloomberg l. p. related quotesisolated storms in north texas could produce as much as five inches of rain.
two men accused of spying for china went on trial tuesday in warsaw — a chinese citizen who is a former sales director of huawei in poland and a polish cybersecurity expert.
the men, weijing wang and piotr durbajlo, have both pleaded not guilty.
join us for a hybrid info session to learn about the weekday mode of the part-time mba.
limited space available, so secure yours today!retailers and unions negotiating over a legally binding workers' safety accord in bangladesh due to expire on monday reached a tentative deal to extend it by three months, unions involved in discussions said, provided the around 200 signatory retailers agree on the extension.
the signatories which include top apparel retailers like zara-owner inditex have until june 10 to state whether they agree, a spokesperson for uni global union, one of the unions involved, said.
at least 10 have given their consent, according to uni global union, including h&m, which confirmed it had agreed to the extension.
frankfurt (reuters) -euro zone inflation surged past the european central bank's elusive target in may, heightening a communications challenge for policymakers who will happily live with higher prices for now but may face a backlash from irate consumers.
inflation in the 19 countries sharing the euro accelerated to 2% in may from 1.
6% in april, driven by higher energy costs to its fastest rate since late 2018 and above the ecb's aim of "below but close to 2%", data from eurostat showed on tuesday.
sydney (reuters) -australia's big banks are likely to return a record $15 billion or more of cash to investors over the next two years, with investors betting commonwealth bank will move first and helping drive shares of the top lender to all-time highs.
commonwealth bank and its smaller rivals australia and new zealand banking group, national australia bank and westpac banking corp have made a remarkable comeback, from being shamed in a public inquiry and shunned by investors three years ago to being sought-after investments now.
the banks have come out of the covid-19 crisis relatively unscathed as australia has kept the pandemic under control and its a$2 trillion ($1.
5 trillion) economy has hummed along.
,《》《》,,!washington (reuters) -the u. s.  supreme court on tuesday declined to hear johnson & johnson's bid to overturn a $2.
12 billion damages award to women who blamed their ovarian cancer on asbestos in the company's baby powder and other talc products.
the justices turned away a j&j appeal and left in place a missouri state court ruling in litigation brought by 22 women whose claims were heard together in one trial.
the missouri court of appeals, an intermediate state appellate court, last year ruled against j&j's bid to throw out the compensatory and punitive damages awarded to the plaintiffs but reduced the total to $2.
12 billion from the $4.
69 billion originally decided by a jury.
j. p.  morgan warns of more pain ahead for bitcoin prices.
here's why.
hong kong (reuters) -top glove corporation's plan to list in hong kong and raise up to $1 billion has been delayed as the world's largest rubber glove maker seeks to resolve a u. s.  import ban on its products, sources with direct knowledge of the matter said.
the delay is another setback to the malaysian company from a ban on imports on its products imposed in july by the u. s.  customs and border protection (cbp) citing forced labour practices.
top glove, which is already listed in kuala lumpur and singapore, flagged in april it would sell 793.
5 million shares in the listing, half what it proposed in its application to the hong kong bourse in february.
,,?,!
/  / ,!
(bloomberg) -- malaysian stocks dropped and the ringgit weakened after the government imposed a two-week nationwide lockdown to curb a relentless surge in covid-19 infections.
the ftse bursa malaysia klci index fell as much as 1.
6% on monday, before paring losses to 0.
7% at the close in kuala lumpur.
the ringgit slid as much as 0.
4% to 4.
1480 per dollar, while 10-year bond yields rose three basis points to 3.
25%.
the government said on friday that most businesses will be shut from june 1 except for essential economic and service sectors.
"the government is finally biting the bullet," said alexander chia, an analyst at rhb investment bank bhd.
"clearly, there are downside risks to fy21 earnings growth, even if it is essentially a postponement of growth to fy22.
"malaysia's return to a hard lockdown comes in the wake of record daily infections that saw cases top 9,000 on saturday.
a resurgence in virus outbreaks in asia has spurred some countries including vietnam and singapore to tighten restrictions.
a similar lockdown in malaysia last year cost the country an estimated 63 billion ringgit ($15 billion).
vietnam tightened social distancing measures in ho chi minh city for 15 days from may 31, while singapore this month reissued some lockdown-like conditions that it put in place a year ago.
recovery dimsmalaysia's lockdown will "drag on the country's recovery, with a good chance that 2q gdp growth will contract on a sequential basis," said khoon goh, head of asia research at australia & new zealand banking group ltd.  "we will likely see the ringgit continuing to underperform in the region, but its weakness is being put in check by a soft u. s.  dollar.
"read: 'covid zero' havens find reopening harder than taming virusprime minister muhyiddin yassin is due to announce an aid package at 9 p. m.  local time monday, according to his facebook post.
still, monday's market drop pales in comparison with last year when the klci plunged as much as 5% a day after a nationwide lockdown was announced then.
expectations of a "mild" reaction is due to the availability of vaccines and a government plan to ramp up daily vaccination rates in the second half of 2021, ivy ng lee fang, an analyst at cgs-cimb securities, said in a report.
strong export sales, robust market liquidity, and low interest rates have also helped limit the market drop, she said.
gdp outlookmalaysia's gross domestic product shrank 0.
5% in the first quarter from a year earlier, the central bank said earlier in may, adding that it expects growth to remain within the 6% to 7.
5% forecast range for the full year.
banks including public bank bhd.
and cimb group holdings bhd.
dropped, while maxis bhd.
and supermax corp.  were among the biggest decliners in the benchmark gauge, falling more than 2%.
top glove corp.  was the top gainer in the key stock gauge, up 1.
8%.
the malaysian stock benchmark is down 6% from a december high as investor concerns about the impact of stricter curbs on movement weigh on riskier assets.
the "recovery plays in the cyclical sectors will require a longer term investment perspective with a focus on achieving a favorable entry price," said chia of rhb investment.
"the trading angle will remain an enduring theme in the coming quarters that continues to focus on small-mid caps with resilient growth attributes.
"(updates with pm's broadcast in seventh paragraph)more stories like this are available on bloomberg.
comsubscribe now to stay ahead with the most trusted business news source.
©2021 bloomberg l. p. fed officials helped support gold prices by tamping down concerns about runaway inflation and keeping bond yields in check.
(bloomberg) -- zimbabwe's mines minister has informed todal mining ltd. , a venture controlled by eurasian resources group, that its platinum mining concessions could be seized because no progress has been made in developing them.
the bokai and kinonde concessions may be taken over under the "use-it/lose-it principle" which allows the state to repossess idle mining claims, minister winston chitando said in a letter to todal dated may 28 and seen by bloomberg.
the mines ministry confirmed the veracity of the document.
"i note with concern that over the last few years there have been several changes to the work program to make this project progress to production stage," chitando said in the letter.
zimbabwe, which has the world's third-biggest platinum group metal reserves, has struggled to develop its mining potential with investors from russia, cyprus, nigeria and kazakhstan yet to bring projects into production.
the todal assets were taken from anglo american platinum ltd. , which does operate a mine in zimbabwe, more than a decade ago and handed to central african mining & exploration co.  that company was bought by eurasian natural resources co. , which later became eurasian resources group.
central african mining lent the zimbabwean government $100 million at the time.
'chance to respond'"this is due process in the spirit of administrative justice," polite kambamura, zimbabwe's deputy mines minister, said by phone.
"we will give the asset holder a chance to respond through the mining affairs board.
if there are any developments that they have made on it which we are not aware of they will make those submissions and a final decision will be made after all due process has been done.
"enrc, china move toward platinum output at zimbabwe deposits erg didn't immediately respond to questions sent by email and text message.
in 2013, the government said production on the mine was due to start that year.
in 2008, camec said a mine producing 150,000 ounces of platinum annually could be built for $200 million.
more stories like this are available on bloomberg.
comsubscribe now to stay ahead with the most trusted business news source.
©2021 bloomberg l. p. citi | wharton global wealth institute,(bloomberg) -- exxon mobil corp.  is pulling out of a deep-water oil prospect in ghana just two years after the west african nation ratified an exploration and production agreement with the u. s.  oil titan.
the company relinquished the entirety of its stake in the deepwater cape three points block and resigned as its operator after fulfilling its contractual obligations during the initial exploration period, according to a letter to ghana's government seen by bloomberg and people familiar with the matter, who asked not to be named because the information isn't public.
exxon controlled 80% of the block, with state-owned ghana national petroleum corp.  holding 15% and ghana oil co. , the remaining 5%.
the two partners will now have to search for a new operator for the block, the people said.
the work done so far included processing about 2,200 square kilometers (850 square miles) of seismic data, but exxon didn't drill any exploration wells, the people said.
exxon couldn't immediately comment during the memorial day holiday in the u. s.  representatives for ghana national and ghana oil couldn't immediately be reached.
more stories like this are available on bloomberg.
comsubscribe now to stay ahead with the most trusted business news source.
©2021 bloomberg l. p. the company said it would issue 8.
5 million shares to mudrick capital, its latest share sale this year it cashes in on a 1,150% jump in its stock in 2021.
"this can be a real way for amc to grow again, creating immediate value for amc shareholders," chief executive officer adam aron wrote in a twitter thread https://twitter.
com/ceoadam/status/1399683077660721152.
amc shares recently traded at around $31.
(bloomberg) -- sign up for the new economy daily newsletter, follow us @economics and subscribe to our podcast.
turkey's economy has continued to grow at a strong pace so far this year, but that doesn't necessarily mean its citizens are getting richer.
the $717 billion economy likely outperformed all group of 20 nations except for china in the first quarter after nearly stalling a year ago when the pandemic struck.
it's been bolstered by robust consumption on the back of last year's government-led credit push, an expansion that came at the expense of price and currency stability.
data on monday is likely to show gross domestic product rose 6.
3% from a year earlier and 1.
3% from the fourth quarter, according to the medians of forecasts in bloomberg surveys.
treasury and finance minister lutfi elvan said thursday that "data point to 6% growth in the first quarter.
"there is an "exchange rate illusion" in turkey's economic growth data, according to enver erkan, chief economist at istanbul-based tera yatirim, who's ranked by bloomberg as the most accurate forecaster on turkish gdp data.
noting that the gdp per capita in u. s.  dollar terms dropped nearly 40% since 2013 to around $7,700 last year, erkan said turkey's recent economic model isn't sustainable as the growth is mainly driven by consumption supported by government spending and loan campaigns.
"this comes at the expense of lira and price stability," he said.
the government pushed banks to ramp up lending to help businesses and consumers ride out last year's covid-19 emergency.
the credit boom was coupled with a front-loaded easing cycle that helped prime the economy.
that growth push weakened the currency by 20% last year and kept headline inflation in double digits.
the size of the economy dropped to $717 billion last year from $760.
8 billion a year earlier.
the currency further lost 10% against the dollar in the first quarter, especially after president recep tayyip erdogan fired the central bank's former hawkish governor naci agbal in march.
the decision to fire agbal, who had sought to restore the central bank's credibility, set off a swift reversal of investor enthusiasm, sending turkish markets into a nosedive.
the data expose the challenge facing new central bank governor sahap kavcioglu as he looks to restore price stability without cooling the economy ahead of the general elections in 2023. kavcioglu has pledged policy continuity after his appointment and kept benchmark interest rate unchanged at 19% for a second meeting this month, saying the pace of price gains had peaked in april.
consumer inflation quickened for a seventh month to 17.
14% in april.
more stories like this are available on bloomberg.
comsubscribe now to stay ahead with the most trusted business news source.
©2021 bloomberg l. p. all asset classes.
industry-leading prices.
user-friendly investing online.
bitcoin's range play continues even as short-term price indicator turns bullish.
the bulk of share trading in the european union takes place on exchanges with relatively little inside banks, an industry body said on tuesday in a bid to stop what it called bourses seeking to "perpetuate their dominance".
the eu is reviewing its stock and bond trading rules, known as mifid ii, triggering a battle between exchanges and their top customers, the banks and large asset managers, over competition.
the eu's securities watchdog esma has estimated that nearly half of trading is off an exchange, prompting bourses to call for this part of the market to face tougher curbs so that more trading goes onto 'lit' venues like the main exchanges.
the dogecoin price may be finishing may off its highs for the month, but it has still been a rock star asset after advancing more than 6,000% year-to-date.
,brussels (reuters) -finance ministers from the group of seven rich nations (g7) will vow this week to support their economies as they emerge from the pandemic and reach an "ambitious" deal on a minimum global corporate tax in july, a draft communique showed.
g7 officials, set to meet in london on june 4-5, will also say that once the recovery is well established, they will need to "ensure long-term sustainability of public finances", which is understood to be code for a gradual withdrawal of stimulus.
the g7 comprises the united states, japan, britain, germany, france, italy and canada.
dubai/paris (reuters) -qatar airways has clashed with european planemaker airbus over the painting of an a350 jetliner in a heated dispute that threatens to delay a resumption of european deliveries to the gulf carrier, industry sources said.
chief executive akbar al baker has criticised airbus without giving details of the dispute, but the sources said it involves the latest in a series of quality-control spats between the airline and airbus.
qatar airways and airbus declined to comment.
climate activists who scored big against western majors last week had some unlikely cheerleaders in the oil capitals of saudi arabia, abu dhabi and russia.
defeats in the courtroom and boardroom mean royal dutch shell, exxonmobil and chevron are all under pressure to cut carbon emissions faster.
advertisementsupported bya fire has raged on a cargo ship off the coast of sri lanka for 12 days, sending toxic chemicals and tons of plastic into the country's waters and polluting its beaches.
by aanya wipulasena and mujib mashalcolombo, sri lanka — the authorities in sri lanka have opened a criminal investigation into the crew of a cargo ship laden with toxic chemicals that has been burning off the island nation's coast for 12 days, spilling debris into the ocean and polluting the country's beaches.
several tons of plastic pellets that were being transported on the ship have washed ashore, and sri lanka's marine protection authority described the spill as "probably the worst beach pollution in our history. "
security personnel have been employed to scour the country's beaches for the pellets used in the production of plastic bags and fishing has been discouraged for miles along the coast.
a spokesman for sri lanka's navy said the fire, which broke out aboard the ship, mv x-press pearl, on may 20, had been contained, but on tuesday thick, black smoke was still seen rising from the burned containers on the ship's deck.
the spokesman, captain indika de silva, said the ship was carrying 1,486 containers, many of which contained so-called dangerous goods, including nitric acid, caustic soda, sodium methoxide and methane.
the ship was loaded with 350 tons of oil, and a combination of heavy fuel and marine fuel.
captain de silva said it was "too early to say about an oil spill," but warned that there was "still a possibility.
""this is one of the worst marine disasters that has happened in sri lanka," said dr.  asha de vos, a marine biologist.
"our only saving grace is that there was no oil spill.
if that happens, that will be incredibly tragic.
"x-press feeders, the company that operated the vessel, said that a container onboard had been leaking nitric acid well before the ship entered the waters off sri lanka, a teardrop-shaped island near india.
the ship's crew requested it be permitted to offload the leaking container at two previous stops, in india and qatar, but were denied because the ports lacked the "specialist facilities or expertise" needed to "deal with the leaking acid," according to x-press feeders.
the police have questioned the ship's crew and sent contaminated water samples to labs for testing.
of the 25 crew members who were rescued and taken to quarantine facilities, two required treatment for injuries sustained during the evacuation and one tested positive for covid-19, the ship's operator said.
as the authorities seek to determine the cause of the fire, locals living along the coast near colombo, the capital, have began a major cleanup.
"i have never seen anything like this before," said dinesh wijayasinghe, 47, an employee at a hotel in the coastal town of negombo.
"when i first saw this, about three to four days ago, the beach was covered with these pellets.
they looked like fish eyes.
"mr.  wijayasinghe said sri lankan security personnel have collected as many as 200 bags worth of plastic pellets every day since the fire began.
"still, more keeps washing ashore," he said.
"we are told not to go to this area.
so we are keeping away.
"dr.  de vos, the marine biologist, said the amount of plastic found on the island's western and southern coasts was troublingplastic pollution, he said, can be a danger to humans and animals, including endangered species like turtles, which hatch their eggs on the beach.
"the pellets can soak and absorb the chemicals from the environment," he said.
"this is an issue because when we eat whole fish, we will also be eating these chemicals.
"advertisement
singapore a doctor has had his licence suspended for four months for bringing disrepute to the profession.
he was caught taking upskirt videos of two women in 2016. dr deshan kumar rajeswaran was caught in the act at an ntuc fairprice supermarket at amk hub in july that year.
the police and the attorney-general's chambers served him a 24-month conditional warning in october 2016.  he satisfied the condition of refraining from similar or other criminal conduct.
the singapore police force had informed the singapore medical council (smc) of the incident and the warning issued.
in december that year, the smc filed a letter of complaint to the chairman of the complaints panel.
this panel looks at all complaints and decides if any has merit and, if so, the action that needs to follow.
in april 2017, a complaints committee was set up to investigate the matter.
the doctor, a consultant rehabilitation physician at the department of rehabilitation medicine at tan tock seng hospital, admitted to the fault in august that year.
he said that his actions were done on impulse as a result of a prolonged period of stress and anxiety at work and at home.
in his written explanation, dr deshan said he had sought psychiatric help, and had been attending psychological therapy sessions, as well as maintaining good physical, emotional, psychological and social support systems.
the committee issued a letter of advice to the doctor in december that year, encouraging him to continue with his treatment.
[[nid:202301]]in january 2018, the smc wrote to the minister for health appealing against the committee's decision.
in may 2019, the ministry of health (moh) directed the smc to appoint a disciplinary tribunal to look into the matter.
dr deshan was informed in march 2020.  because of the circuit breaker measures for covid-19, the pre-inquiry conference was delayed till june.
the tribunal said the harm caused was "moderate", but culpability was low as it had not been premeditated.
it noted that the doctor had been "suffering from persistent depressive disorder" at that time, caused by stress both at work and at home.
he has been treated for this and it no longer affects him.
however, the tribunal recommends that he continues with his treatment every two to three months.
as penalty, it imposed a four-month suspension, followed by conditional registration for a year during which he may only work under supervision.
other conditions include no "private consultations without a chaperone present when attending to female patients".
he was also censured and has to pay the cost of the proceedings.
the decision was published on the smc website on june 1. this article was first published in the straits times.
permission required for reproduction.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
my fellow singaporeans, for the last three weeks, we have been on heightened alert.
we had discovered new clusters of covid-19 infections.
one cluster at tan tock seng hospital, and then another at changi airport.
more cases soon followed.
we also started seeing unlinked cases, implying community spread.
so we had to step back from phase three.
we went on heightened alert to reduce social interaction and new infections.
everyone has responded, to cooperate on the measures we had to take.
offices, malls, and the streets are all visibly quieter.
because of your support, the number of daily cases has come down.
barring another super-spreader or big cluster, we should be on track to bring this outbreak under control.
we will know for sure in another week or so.
meanwhile, i count on everyone to keep up our efforts and stay vigilant.
please continue to stay home, work from home if possible, and go out only if you must.
most importantly, if you feel unwell, see a doctor immediately even if you have been vaccinated.
if our situation continues to improve, and the number of community cases falls further, we should be able to relax the restrictions after june 13. compared to a year ago, when we had our first big outbreak, we are in a much better position today.
we have built up our testing and contact tracing capabilities.
crucially, our vaccination programme is well advanced.
with stronger defences in place, we have not had to impose a full circuit breaker.
unfortunately, we are also fighting new, more infectious variants of the covid-19 virus.
the b117 variant, which was first detected in the uk, has become widespread in the us and many other countries.
we are now dealing with the b1617.
2 variant, which was first detected in india and is now in over 50 countries.
more variants will inevitably emerge, and we will have to deal with them too.
what does a more infectious virus mean for our fight against covid-19?
it implies that we must continually adjust our strategies, and raise our game to keep covid-19 under control.
specifically, there are three things that we have to do more of, and do faster: testing, contact tracing, and vaccination.
let me briefly explain.
the multi-ministry taskforce (mtf) will provide details later on.
first, we must test faster, and more liberally and extensively.
this will enable us to detect covid-19 cases more quickly.
so that we can isolate them and ring-fence their contacts promptly, before the virus spreads further.
many different types of covid-19 tests have become available, for example, antigen rapid tests (arts), saliva tests, breathalysers, wastewater surveillance, even sniffer dogs.
we have been using some of these, and evaluating others, for some time.
each of these new tests is suited to different use cases.
for example, arts produce results much faster than the polymerase chain reaction (pcr) tests that we have mostly relied on.
arts are also cheaper and easier to administer.
however, they are less sensitive than pcr tests.
they may miss some cases that are actually covid-19 positive.
arts are therefore invaluable as a quick check.
if you visit a gp or polyclinic now with an acute respiratory infection, you will be given an art, in addition to a pcr test.
within 30 minutes, the art will show whether you are likely to have covid-19.
if the result is positive, you can immediately be isolated and the pcr test will confirm your diagnosis later, which may take a day or two.
that way we reduce your chances of infecting others, if you are already ill but don't realise it.
other tests are coming on stream.
breathalyser tests, which take just one minute, have been set up at the causeway and the airport.
they can be deployed to many other places too and soon you will be able to purchase diy tests over the counter at pharmacies.
they are simple to use, and not so uncomfortable.
you can administer these on your own.
if you are worried that you may have covid-19 and want to put your mind at ease.
or if you are a front-line worker, and want to test yourself frequently or even daily.
these alternatives to pcr tests help us detect and isolate persons quickly when they are most infectious.
this will be a big help in slowing down the spread of covid-19.
as the virus mutates to become more transmissible, we must respond by testing more widely.
we already do rostered routine testing (rrt) in a number of higher-risk settings: migrant worker dormitories, construction worksites, shipyards, air and sea ports, hospitals and nursing homes.
with faster, cheaper tests, we can do routine testing at more workplaces, like offices, restaurants and shopping malls.
we can also routinely test individuals whose occupations involve close contact with many people, and could result in superspreading events, like taxi drivers and bus captains, physiotherapists, masseurs, stage performers, sports and fitness instructors and educators; (they) could all be tested regularly.
this will reassure their customers, patients and students, and enable them to work safely even with covid-19 in circulation.
in short, we are shifting our approach to testing.
henceforth we will not only test to identify infections when a new case pops up, we will also routinely and regularly test people who appear well, in normal work or social or community settings, to make them, and these places safe.
extensive testing will give us confidence to resume larger-scale events or gatherings.
for example, we can deploy fast and easy tests before a religious service, a football game, a concert, or a wedding reception and participants can be assured that the event is covid-19 safe.
therefore, you should expect routine, large-scale, fast and simple testing to be part of our new normal.
second, we will contact trace faster and more widely.
our contact tracing operations have vastly improved.
the contact tracers are working faster and better because they have more experience and skills, and better tools.
tracetogether helps them identify and quarantine close contacts of an infected case within hours rather than days.
with safeentry, they can identify thousands of people who had visited the same places as infected cases, and inform these potential contacts to come forward for a free covid-19 test.
this is what we did for white sands, jem and westgate, and now ntuc foodfare in anchorvale.
because of singaporeans' self-discipline, public spirit and support of tracetogether and safeentry, we are contact tracing faster and more comprehensively.
we can improve our contact tracing further by casting the net wider.
our experience has shown that if a close contact is infected, he is quite likely to infect others who stay with him in the same household.
therefore, in future, when we identify a close contact of an infected case, we will not only isolate him the first-degree contact and test him for covid-19, we will also notify his household members to isolate themselves immediately, without waiting to see whether the first-degree contact tests positive.
if later the first-degree contact tests negative, we can safely release his household members from isolation.
but if later the first-degree contact tests positive, we will have saved precious time by isolating his household members earlier.
this more aggressive approach will help us to shut down clusters more quickly, to lead to fewer cases.
third, we will vaccinate more people, and faster.
we have made good progress since vaccinations started in december.
our healthcare and front-line workers, and the majority of those 45 and above, have already received at least their first dose.
these are the ones more at risk from covid-19.
now, vaccination of those aged 40 to 44 is under way.
the mtf recently announced that we would speed up vaccinations in the next two months, and prioritise first dose vaccinations.
this is in progress.
we want to protect as many singaporeans as possible, and as soon as we can, especially with the new covid-19 variants.
this approach will quickly provide the maximum number of people with good protection, instead of a good number of people with maximum protection.
we are vaccinating as many people as our supplies allow.
our 40 vaccination centres islandwide are running smoothly.
the constraint is vaccine supply.
this is why we have been working very hard to confirm and speed up deliveries of vaccines from our suppliers.
i am happy to report that since the last update by the mtf, we have received further confirmation of faster vaccine deliveries over the next two months.
with the latest supply schedule, we can further boost our vaccination programme.
we can offer the vaccine to everyone, even sooner than we expected.
the next group to be vaccinated will be students.
in this latest outbreak, we have seen more cases of children getting infected, in schools and tuition centres.
the children were not seriously ill, but parents are naturally worried.
therefore, we will take full advantage of the june holidays to vaccinate students.
bookings will open tomorrow.
we will give priority to the graduating cohorts for o, n, and a levels, as well as special needs students.
then the other students 12 years and above will take their turn, including students in our institutions of higher learning.
after the students, we will vaccinate the final remaining group, young adults 39 years and younger.
this should start around mid-june.
this group is quite large.
therefore, we will give the singaporeans among them a two-week priority window to book your appointments first, before we open up to the rest who want to be vaccinated.
finally, i want to make a special pitch to our elderly.
your response has been excellent.
nearly three quarters (73 per cent) of our elderly 760,000 senior citizens aged 60 and above have had at least one jab or booked a slot already.
but 280,000 of you have still not yet booked appointments.
please come forward to get jabbed as soon as possible.
most people of your age have already been vaccinated, including many of your friends and neighbours.
the president and i have been vaccinated too, and so have all my cabinet colleagues.
the vaccines are safe, and they will keep you safe.
we will make the process even more convenient for you.
if you are above 60, you can now walk into any vaccination centre, and get vaccinated on the spot.
no need to register, no need to book in advance, just turn up at a vaccination centre, and you will be jabbed.
if you are not mobile, or are unable to make your way to the vaccination centre, contact the silver generation office, a doctor and nurse will visit you at your home to give you the vaccination.
for those with elderly parents or relatives, please encourage and persuade your old folks to get vaccinated.
today, nearly four in 10 residents have had at least one dose of the vaccine.
our next target is to get two-thirds of residents vaccinated with at least the first dose.
with our accelerated vaccination programme, we should be able to do this by early july, provided supplies come in as planned.
and everyone who is eligible for a vaccination and wants one should be able to get at least their first jab by national day.
whether you are old or young, please come forward to be vaccinated once it is your turn.
with the more infectious virus strains, we need as many people as possible to be vaccinated, in order to reach herd immunity, or get close to it.
this is the way to make everyone safe and resume more normal activities.
even as we tackle our covid-19 situation, the pandemic rages on around us.
many countries are still not able to bring it under control, fully, much less eliminate it.
india has suffered a huge surge of new cases, although their numbers are now coming down.
in south-east asia, many countries have not started vaccinations in a big way, and may see more spikes in the next few months.
malaysian cases have been rising, and they are just entering a nationwide full lockdown.
even places that have kept covid-19 well under control, like taiwan, australia and vietnam, have recently experienced outbreaks.
one day, this global pandemic will subside but i do not expect covid-19 to disappear.
it will remain with humankind, and become endemic.
the virus will continue to circulate in pockets of the global population for years to come.
this also means we will see small outbreaks of the disease from time to time in singapore as well.
in this new normal, we will have to learn to carry on with our lives even with the virus in our midst.
our aim must be to keep the community as a whole safe, while accepting that some people may get infected every now and then.
just as we do with the common flu or dengue fever, which we now manage through public health measures and personal precautions.
and in the case of the flu, with regular vaccinations too.
covid-19 vaccinations will not entirely prevent you from getting covid-19 but vaccination makes this much less likely.
and if you do get sick, despite being vaccinated, you are also much less likely to become very ill. living with endemic covid-19 also means we do not completely close our borders.
we need food, essential supplies, workers, business and other travellers to keep on flowing.
we must stay connected to the world, with effective safeguards and border restrictions to keep ourselves safe.
we will not be able to prevent some infected persons from slipping through from time to time.
but as long as our population is mostly vaccinated, we should be able to trace, isolate, and treat the cases that pop up, and prevent a severe and disastrous outbreak.
singapore's priority is to get through this pandemic and position ourselves strongly for the future, even as the virus continues to rage around us.
if we stay united and continue to work together, we will be able to progressively open up, and achieve our aim.
in the new normal, covid-19 will not dominate our lives.
our people will be mostly vaccinated, and possibly taking booster shots every year.
we will get tested often, but it will be fast and easy.
we will go to work or school, meet friends and family, participate in religious services, and enjoy entertainment and sports events.
we will reopen our borders safely.
visitors will again come to singapore.
singaporeans will travel again to countries where the disease is well under control, especially if we have been vaccinated.
and eventually, we will even go about without masks again, at least outdoors.
right now, we are some ways off from this happy state, but we are heading in the right direction.
in this new normal, the countries which are united, disciplined, and put in place sensible safeguards will be able to reopen their economies, reconnect to the rest of the world, grow and prosper.
singapore will be among these countries.
more confident and resilient than before, and toughened by what we have overcome together, and experience together as one nation.
i have outlined our strategy for the next phase of the fight against covid-19.
to keep our people safe, while reopening progressively.
we have to test, we have to trace, we have to vaccinate and we have to do all three of these more quickly, and more extensively.
the heightened alert has two more weeks to go.
i thank singaporeans for your forbearance, cooperation and support.
each individual effort counts.
our collective discipline and social responsibility have served us well, and taken us thus far.
let us go the distance together as one people, so that we can look forward to a new normal, and emerge as a stronger and more united singapore.
thank you.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore all residents of a housing board block in yishun, and two blocks in hougang have been asked to go for swab tests after surveillance measures and wastewater testing detected likely cases of covid-19 transmission there.
the mandatory tests will be conducted for all residents living in block 745 yishun street 72, as well as blocks 501 and 507 hougang avenue 8, on tuesday and wednesday, the ministry of health (moh) said on monday (may 31).
moh said surveillance testing detected six covid-19 cases among residents of block 745 yishun street 72, from two households, with subsequent wastewater testing detecting covid-19 viral fragments in the block.
investigations are ongoing to determine linkages and the source of transmission.
in a letter to residents seen by the straits times on monday, grassroots adviser to nee soon grc faishal ibrahim said this was a precautionary measure to ensure the safety and well-being of residents of block 745. he added that residents living in surrounding blocks need not be tested unless they have visited households in block 745 between may 15 and may 24.
"nee soon town council has done a thorough cleaning and disinfection of the common area at block 745 and the surrounding blocks," he said.
separately, mandatory testing will also be carried out at blocks 501 and 507 hougang avenue 8, after covid-19 viral fragments were detected in wastewater samples collected from these blocks.
there are currently no known covid-19 cases there.
the tests for all three blocks will be conducted on tuesday and wednesday between 9am and 4pm.
leaflets will be distributed and sms notifications will be sent out to residents to provide them with more information, added moh.
"residents are also advised to monitor their health closely and consult a doctor immediately if they feel unwell.
"earlier, moh had identified 11 covid-19 cases from at least four households in block 506 hougang avenue 8.  two of these were detected from a mandatory testing exercise for residents.
on may 24, the 304 residents of block 559 pasir ris street 51 were asked to go for testing after four covid-19 cases were detected in two households there.
the ministry of health said on may 25 that all those tests have come back negative.
responding to a question raised at a press conference on covid-19 on monday on the circumstances requiring all residents from a block to be tested, singapore's director of medical services, associate professor kenneth mak, said that when clusters in the domestic setting are picked up, the team will start by looking at the obvious chains of transmission and "the modes of transmission that are of concern".
"when we pick up several cases that occur within a fixed geographic vicinity, then we have to be concerned that there may also be chains of transmission that occur to other people that live in that same area," said prof mak.
"and this is the reason why we would then extend and carry out testing operations in a housing precinct involving several blocks of flats," he explained.
these testing operations are also reinforced by looking at data from other testing methods, such as wastewater testing.
screening wastewater samples could complement clinical testing and provide an additional indicator to assess the level of covid-19 spread within a community.
this is because infected individuals, including those who have mild symptoms or are asymptomatic could still be shedding the virus in their stool.
prof mak noted that this may raise concerns as it could suggest that there are additional people who may be asymptomatic but are potentially infectious to others, creating a sense of urgency to launch testing operations at the respective housing blocks.
"so we look at each cluster on a case-by-case basis, looking at the circumstances and making that decision (on) whether we want to organise these testing operations," he said.
though such operations are not easy to carry out, prof mak said, they are necessary as part of singapore's aggressive testing to stay ahead of the curve and prevent further infections in the community.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore singapore airlines (sia) had sought and obtained overwhelming shareholder support to raise funds through its mandatory convertible bonds (mcb) and rights share issues funds that the airline said will put it on a strong footing to re-emerge as a global player as the covid-19 pandemic recedes and borders reopen.
the company was responding to a series of questions put to it last week by the securities investors association of singapore (sias).
"sia sought and obtained strong shareholder support for the additional mcbs at the april 2020 extraordinary general meeting (egm), with 99.
66 per cent of shareholders approving the resolution," the airline said in a response issued via the singapore exchange on tuesday (june 1) morning.
"this was subsequently renewed at the july 2020 annual general meeting (agm), where 99.
76 per cent of shareholders approved the resolution to issue the additional mcbs before the next agm in july 2021.
"the company raised $5.
3 billion via rights shares and $3.
5 billion via mcbs last year.
it wants to raise another $6.
2 billion via mcbs this year before its july 2021 agm.
while the rights issue was well subscribed, the mcb met with tepid response, resulting in substantial shareholder temasek subscribing to the bulk of it, a point that was raised by sias last week.
as the shareholders had voted for the fund raising, it was their prerogative to decide if they would subscribe to the mcbs, subject to their own financial circumstances, said sia.
in all, sia has raised $15.
4 billion in fresh liquidity since april 1 last year.
this includes the $8.
8 billion in rights shares and mcb last year and another $6.
6 billion through bond issues, secured financing, and sale and leaseback transactions.
[[nid:482931]]besides the $6.
2 billion in fresh liquidity it hopes to raise through the latest mcbs, it also has $2.
1 billion in untapped lines of credit on top of all the other funds raised.
because the mcbs are considered equity, sia has more headroom for further debt financing going forward, if needed.
sia said the proceeds would strengthen its financial foundations to meet ongoing financial commitments, allow it to make the necessary investments and capitalise on any opportunities that may arise so as to secure its industry-leading position, as well as provide resources for growth as it navigates through the ongoing crisis.
"the successful implementation of the group's strategy is also dependent on its ability to retain its talented and motivated employees, and to continue having a strong employer brand to attract new talent," said sia.
it added that it had a pipeline of new-generation aircraft airbus a350s and boeing 787s on order that it could use for further secured financing and sale and leaseback transactions.
the airline expects the proceeds to last well through its financial year 2022/2023.
[[nid:509700]]it added: "since the beginning of the covid-19 pandemic crisis, our monthly operating cash burn has dropped to the current levels of around $100 million $150 million per month, from around $350 million at the start of the pandemic.
"we will continue to pursue reduction in cash burn through revenue generation (for example, strong cargo revenue and gradual improvement in passenger flown revenue through more flying activities).
in addition, we will continue to maintain stringent cost management.
"turning to sias' question of whether sia would consider privatisation, the company said: "privatisation is not a matter for sia to consider as it is a shareholder action.
accordingly, sia is not in a position to comment.
"but analysts told the straits times that if privatisation were ever to be contemplated which is unlikely such an exercise could only be done with the approval of majority shareholder temasek.
sia said it was grateful to all shareholders, including retail investors, for their strong support over the years and especially since the start of the covid-19 pandemic.
"our goal is to provide long-term value for shareholders by ensuring that the company returns to profitability and remains a leader in the airline industry as we navigate the challenges posed by the covid-19 pandemic," it said.
this article was first published in the straits times.
permission required for reproduction.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
geneva (afp) covid-19 variants are to be known by letters of the greek alphabet to avoid stigmatising nations where they were first detected, the world health organisation (who) announced on monday (may 31).
the new system applies to variants of concern the most troubling of which are four in circulation and the second-level variants of interest being tracked.
"they will not replace existing scientific names, but are aimed to help in public discussion," said dr maria van kerkhove, the who's covid-19 technical lead.
under the new system, the variants of concern take on the following names: the hitherto so-called british variant b117 becomes alpha; the b1351 first detected in south africa becomes beta, while the brazilian p. 1 becomes gamma.
the so-called indian variant b1617 is split into sub-lineages, of which the b16172 variant of concern becomes delta.
the b16171 variant of interest is called kappa.
besides these names, there are two other scientific names in use for each mutation, while different geographic names have been used to describe the same variant.
for example, within britain, what other countries have been referring to as the british variant is often called the kent variant the county in south-east england where it was first detected.
the lineage names such as b1172 will still continue to be used in scientific circles, for the mutation information that their name conveys.
"while they have their advantages, these scientific names can be difficult to say and recall, and are prone to misreporting," the who said in a statement.
"as a result, people often resort to calling variants by the places where they are detected, which is stigmatising and discriminatory.
"to avoid this and to simplify public communications, who encourages national authorities, media outlets and others to adopt these new labels. "
in may, united states president joe biden signed a hate crimes law aimed at protecting asian americans who have suffered a surge in attacks during the covid-19 pandemic.
us anti-extremism groups say the number of attacks and hate crimes against asian americans has exploded since the beginning of the crisis.
they lay some of the blame with former president donald trump, who repeatedly referred to covid-19 as the "china virus".
the who has been trying to come up with simplified new nomenclature for the variants for several months.
the greek alphabet contains 24 letters, but there is no plan yet as to where to go next if they are exhausted.
epsilon, zeta, eta, theta and iota have already been ascribed to variants of interest.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
go on a kayaking expedition at pulau ubinsingapore — "zat, do you know why f&b workers are not given priority for covid-19 vaccination?"
chef dylan ong asks over direct chat on instagram the week when phase 2 (heightened alert) started.
his question came amidst a press conference where the newly-minted minister for health, ong ye kung, announced a new vaccination strategy that extends the time between doses so that the maximum number of people can be protected.
students between the ages of 12-15 will also be eligible for the pfizer biontech vaccination.
phase 2 (ha) was announced due to the rising number of unlinked covid-19 cases and the emergence of clusters in singapore with his round of tightened measures spanning 16 may to 13 june 2021.  some of the limitations enforced by phase 2 (ha) are reduced social gathering size to two people (down from five) and reenacting working from home as a default.
dining-in would also no longer be allowed at all f&b outlets across the island, including at hawker centres, coffee shops, and food courts.
for some of the chefs and restaurant owners, i spoke to, this outright ban on dining-in left them blindsided and reminded them a lot of what happened in april last year when singapore enacted circuit breaker measures for three months.
"i was surprised because i thought any new wave would have been mitigated by our collective efforts of mask-wearing, social-distancing, and the usage of contact tracing apps," willin low, chef and founder of wild rocket, shared with me over whatsapp.
"also, don't we have very stringent border controls that include swab tests and strict quarantine measures?
"chef dylan was running lunch service at his restaurant, the masses, when he heard of the announcement on friday, 14 may.
"it was too short a notice for something this drastic to happen by sunday.
for restaurants, saturday will definitely be a full house, especially when it's the last day of dining-in before phase 2 (ha) kicks in.
how do i find time to pivot to full delivery service over one day?
""yes, i know we have done this before," dylan went on to say.
"but it would have been so much better had the government given us an earlier heads up.
i know it's a critical situation that requires decisive decision making.
i expected the government to be more sensible than to dole out this knee-jerk reaction.
"the question of priority vaccination for f&b workersto be completely honest, i've never questioned why people working in the f&b industries weren't given priority for vaccination—at least not until dylan asked.
his concerns, though, were understandable.
in phase 3 that commenced on 28 dec 2020, dining in a group of up to 8 people was permitted.
up until the announcement of phase 2 (ha), eating at restaurants remained the only close contact group activity where masks can be taken off during the entire meal duration—presenting a higher possibility for the virus to spread if safe distancing measures and sanitisation procedures weren't properly adhered.
the perilous state of dining-in was further exacerbated by recent reports that the kopitiam food court at changi airport terminal 3 was visited by several confirmed cases, some of which have already been vaccinated.
changi airport would eventually be named as one of the largest active clusters in phase 3, swelling to more than 100 people.
"a thousand things went through my mind when the ban on dining-in was announced.
but my foremost worry was the safety of my staff, especially since this new b16172 variant is said to be more infectious than the last," said chef johanne siy of lolla at amoy street.
"my greatest concern was both the drop in sales and the increased number of cases that might put my colleagues at risk," dominic tan, founder of ajumma's, shared.
"the daily rise in cases also doesn't assure us that the restrictions will last for only one month.
"minister lawrence wong, co-chair of the covid-19 multi-ministry task force, has since remarked that the current phase 2 (ha) measures are working and that no further tightening is expected.
concerns over employabilityearly this year, phase 3 measures brought some much-needed relief for f&b establishments affected by circuit breaker measures.
some chef-owners i spoke to last month in march even lamented the lack of staff to handle the onslaught of reservations from diners—customers with money to spare and nowhere to spend it except locally through staycations and to dine out at restaurants.
this aura of upbeat positivity has drastically taken a tumble, even if only based on anecdotes.
while circuit breaker seems more a test of inventiveness and how pivot-ready f&b businesses are, phase 2 (ha) is shaping up to be solely about survivability.
"i guess in a way, we are more prepared today than previously as we have at least experienced it once and know what to expect," said chef willin.
"the main challenge now is how to ensure all my colleagues, and i keep our jobs.
"it's a concern shared by the co-founder of apollo coffee bar, shirlynn eng.
"to us, the team is family, and despite the circumstances, our priority is to make sure that our employees will be taken care of.
many of our crew have families both in singapore and internationally—these countries include malaysia, vietnam, and the philippines.
""so our priority is clear.
to do whatever it takes to support and sustain their livelihood.
"concerns over long-term financial stabilitychef dylan readily admits that, like many other chefs, he's now more operationally prepared for delivery and takeaway services even with a tight runway of one day.
but at its core, he posits that the problems and issues remain the same.
f&b owners tend to run with a tight financial capital—any form of disruption in dining-in revenue will most certainly hit them hard.
"unfortunately, it's even harder now as we're unsure what financial support we can get from the government to tide us over.
will there be rental rebates for this one month also?
none of us knows.
"although not immediately announced—and in some ways quite telling of how rushed these phase 2 (ha) measures are—rental relief for smes was recently introduced on 28 may 2021 by finance minister lawrence wong.
under the rental support scheme, privately owned commercial properties can look forward to getting a half month rental relief cash payout directly from the inland revenue authority of singapore.
"from a business standpoint, i think it will be so much harder to survive this round," said chef johanne.
"there's so much more competition from established players and new home-based businesses.
it seems idealistic, but i hope everyone can find a place in the sun and somehow find a way to survive.
"balancing the new normal:sg phase 2 heightened alert: 6 cocktail delivery options for libation loversfoodies rally to patronise ailing elderly hawkers as diners asked to stay homesg phase 2 heightened alert: 10 f&b outlets that deliver familiar comfort food to your homesg phase 2 heightened alert: 11 restaurants that deliver a touch of luxe to your doorstepindonesian restaurant the rice table closing down after 24 yearsnew entrants caught by surprisebusinesses that are only beginning to recoup losses from the three-month circuit breaker are joined by brave f&b entrepreneurs who have delayed the opening of their restaurant concepts to may this year, only to be greeted by the news that dining-in will be banned again for one month.
it is a situation chef jeremy chiam, formerly of now-shuttered le binchotan, is familiar with.
three weeks ago, chiam launched iko, a mod-jap restaurant and bar serving up contemporary japanese fare, robata-grilled bites, as well as a curated collection of sake and japanese-inspired cocktails.
"iko is only three weeks old, and i'm once again facing a ban on dining-in.
it's a new brand that has, unfortunately, come to a standstill after all that marketing effort we put out; it's heartbreaking.
"it's now evident that with every enactment and tightening of covid-19 measures, the industry where the effects are most keenly and immediately felt is in the f&b sector.
according to the singapore department of statistics, f&b sales registered a year-on-year decline of 26% in 2020.  it was the worst-performing year since the growth rate was first recorded back in 1986, surpassing the asian financial crisis in 1998, sars in 2003, and the global financial crisis in 2009. in dollar terms, retail and f&b sales registered a decline of about s$4 billion during circuit breaker.
could phase 2 (ha) measures be better mitigated?with such sobering statistics gleaned from circuit breaker last year, i wondered how the sudden ban on dining-in, and in retrospect, phase 2 (ha) measures could have been better mitigated, especially given that we have experience and prior knowledge on hand.
for dominic, government mitigation and intervention could have been offered earlier, even before phase 2 (ha) measures were enacted.
"i feel that earlier support to manage crowds at f&b establishments could have been put in place, such as encouraging landlords to allow installation of clear perspex or acrylic sheets within the restaurants to create a safer dining environment for diners," said dominic.
dylan, however, was less enthused about how the government went about handling the ban on dining-in.
"we have done this before.
why are we still so lacking in how we prepare the people of singapore for such drastic measures?
government leaders were put in place so they can have better foresight than us ordinary citizens.
this kind of knee jerk reaction speaks volumes of the kind of leaders we have now.
""i'm just extremely disappointed with how this is being handled," dylan went on to add.
in our initial interview, willin wondered if there could have been a more gradual easing in of restrictions by cutting down the number of diners allowed per group instead of implementing such a drastic and sudden outright ban.
"but in view of the 38 local transmissions today (16 may 2021), i guess what the government is doing regarding the ban on dining-in does not seem too out of line, given how infectious this new strain is," said willin a few hours after the number of new community cases was announced.
when life gives you lemonswhile waiting for dining-in to resume, some restaurants are taking a 'when life gives you lemon' approach to the pivot rerun to delivery and takeaway.
at birds of a feather, chef eugene see has put together food bundles featuring signature dishes from the restaurant and its four sister brands.
there's the "french toast" from halcyon & crane, "salmon grain bowl" from 51soho, "king prawn noodles" from chuan hung noodle stall and the signature "find the chicken in the chillis" from birds of a feather.
"by offering this bundle, we hope our customers can experience what we can offer for our food delivery at a group level, and at the same time, bring the best food items to their doorsteps," chef eugene shared.
at shirlynn eng's five cafe concepts—apollo coffee bar, neptune cafe, columbus coffee co. , lunar coffee brewers, and atlas coffeehouse—diners can look forward to the 'choux box', a care package iteration inspired by the first circuit breaker.
then, shirlynn witnessed first-hand the rising practice of people gifting their friends or loved ones 'care packages'.
there's also an encouraging response to the care packages shirlynn rolled out at the time.
as the end date for phase 2 (ha) on june 13 draws to a close, chefs and restaurant owners wait with breath that is bated for dining-in to resume and, for many of us ordinary citizens, for life to regain some semblance of normalcy—however that may look.
undoubtedly, these are tough times for the f&b sector, made more challenging with razor-thin profit margins, disruptions in the supply of raw ingredients due to tightened border controls, and, funnily enough, a vibrant local dining scene with every operator eager for a slice of the proverbial pie.
perhaps shirlynn puts it best.
"we just want our friends, family, and customers to live a little amidst this tough time, love a lot, and laugh over these delightful treats.
it's perhaps exactly what we need these days to get through these four weeks—joy and spontaneity.
"balancing the new normal:sg phase 2 heightened alert: 6 cocktail delivery options for libation loversfoodies rally to patronise ailing elderly hawkers as diners asked to stay homesg phase 2 heightened alert: 10 f&b outlets that deliver familiar comfort food to your homesg phase 2 heightened alert: 11 restaurants that deliver a touch of luxe to your doorstepindonesian restaurant the rice table closing down after 24 yearswatch more lifestyle videos on yahoo tv:she even requested her "bulgy bit of belly" stay in the final cut.
tip the best place for uk surfing and boardsports for the chance to win a £200 holiday.
tell us where's great for boardsports: from surfing to paddleboarding – the best tip wins a voucher for a sawdays holiday stay,《》《》,,!on the centennial of the deadly massacre, locals recall the devastation of black wall street's destruction—and what it might take to make it right.
new exhibition shows peanuts creator charles m schulz's take on grown-upsadults by schulz at the museum dedicated to the cartoonist in california offers possible glimpse of charlie brown's later life charles m schulz's hagemayer strips, which never reached fruition, will get their first public exhibition more than two decades after his death.
photograph: alamythe perfect way to relax all year long.
,.
,,,,,,.
raven-symoné hasn't let the pandemic get in the way of her healthy living efforts.
the actor and former host of the view took to instagram to share the latest on her "pounds down" journey with her fans, revealing some of the steps she took to achieve her impressive weight loss.
"check out the chin!"
the actor exclaims in a new instagram live video.
view this post on instagram a post shared by raven-symoné (@ravensymone)"i got a whole different face going on," says symoné.
"it's a whole pounds doher tennis shoes included a special custom message.
there is nothing worse than thigh rub in the summer.
,!
.
!southwest is pushing back its return date for alcohol sales while american airlines won't sell booze on board until september.
stan stars as the mötley crüe drummer in the upcoming hulu miniseries 'pam & tommy.
'because glitter nail polish is the easiest way to add some detail to your everyday manicure.
why not try adding just a stripe of pink glitter down the centre of the nail?
check out london nail salon, townhouse, if you need a little inspiration, they are masters when it comes to minimal (but magical) nail art.
all asset classes.
industry-leading prices.
user-friendly investing online.
"i'm choosing to love myself.
.
.
and not edit myself depending on the room that i'm in.
"don't jump into a new fitness routine without considering how the last year has impacted your body.
"the sandman" author neil gaiman slammed criticism over the weekend of the recent castings announced for netflix's tv adaptation of his beloved comic book series, which includes a nonbinary actor playing desire — who is a nonbinary character in "the sandman" — and black actress kirby howell-baptiste set as death — a character that visually depicted as white in the comics.
"i give all the f–ks about the work," gaiman tweeted saturday in response to a user who accused the "the sandman" creator of,hk$1,000!
!the daytime cohost is on a leave of absence to focus on her wellbeing.
"cyprus absolutely deserves to be green-listed," says savvas perdios, the country's deputy minister of tourism.
"we have made a lot of progress, especially over the last month," he told telegraph travel on tuesday.
cyprus was, of course, the first eu nation to reopen to fully-vaccinated britons or those with a negative pcr test result.
mr perdios is attempting to secure a spot on our so far meagre green list during his visit to the uk.
he is hopeful this will happen in time for the june 7 updatewwe has hired jamie horowitz to lead wwe studios and oversee the pro-wrestling company's scripted and unscripted programming for digital and social media.
since wwe network was rolled into nbcuniversal's peacock streaming service earlier this year, a lot of horowitz's digital work will end up on that platform.
he's also working on a vince mcmahon documentary at netflix, among other outside (peacock) projects.
horowitz, who was most recently at dazn, joins wwe with the title executive vice presidhere is what whole mouth dental implants should cost you in your areawalking into costco right now is almost like traveling back in time.
the warehouse chain has been busy bringing back tons of pre-pandemic perks, especially at the food court.
not only are you able to eat inside again at the iconic picnic tables, but now, you also won't have to ask employees behind the counter for condiments.
the condiment station—complete with ketchup, mustard, deli mustard, relish, napkins, and cutlery—is available to use at some locations.
reddit user @pharr0utt spotted it at their location, and although they don't confirm exactly where that is, they did reveal some other important news: the return of the condiment station also means the onion crank is open for business, too.
related: costco foods you should always avoid, according to nutritionistsso not to worry, even though it isn't pictured, the option to put onions on the $1.
50 hot dog combo or chicken bake (or any other menu item that is available right now) is there for any hungry costco shopper.
another reddit user says the station returned three to four months ago at their costco, but it's still missing a few items.
the stations were removed back when the covid-19 pandemic began in order to limit the number of items customers and employees touch (and also to avoid having to clean that station in between uses).
costco kept this rule for over a year, along with many other grocery stores and restaurants that chose to do the same.
the warehouse's covid-19 updates page still says that customers should "please ask costco food court employees for available condiments.
"at the end of may, costco cfo richard galanti revealed that food samples will be back at 170 out of 550 warehouses by the first week of june, and the new churro will be on all food court menus by july 4.  he didn't mention the condiment station (or the onion crank), so a nationwide rollout may not be in the cards just yet.
to get all the latest costco news delivered right to your email inbox every day, sign up for our newsletter!twitter users were divided after a photo of actress ellie kemper being crowned the 1999 queen of love and beauty at st.  louis' veiled prophet ball resurfaced according to a 2014 article in the atlantic, the event's organizers "emphasized the existing power structure" and banned black and jewish members.
the social media divide started with a tweet: "so was no one gonna tell me ellie kemper aka kimmy schmidt was crowned kkk queen in 1999?"
asked one user, posting an old newspaper photo of the actaccording to pizza hut, customers just can't get over the iconic thin-crust pizza the chain used to serve back in the 1990s and 2000s.
the edge, which was first released in 1997, has been missing from the menus for over a decade, but it has been top-of-mind for fans nonetheless.
and thanks to the current trend of resurrecting beloved fast-food items of yesteryear, the pie is now back at pizza hut by popular demand.
"the edge is a pizza our customers constantly ask us to bring back.
anyone who loves thin-crust pizzas loaded with toppings will love the edge," said pizza hut's general manager david graves.
the beloved item made several limited-time appearances on the menu over the years, but hasn't been seen since 2009. related: one of america's fastest-growing pizza chains plans to open 460 new locationsthis tavern-style pizza is made with thin 'n crispy, the first type of dough ever used at pizza hut restaurants in the 1950s.
but the cracker-like crust isn't its only unique feature—it also features toppings that stretch all the way to the edges (hence the name), leaving no parts of the crust bare and making every bite as good as the last one.
the new version of the edge is slathered in the chain's signature tomato sauce and will feature another novelty: a garlic and herb seasoning which the chain developed just for this launch.
the edge will come in four different varieties:the ultimate is packed with pepperoni, italian sausage, green peppers, onions, and roma tomatoes.
the carnivore is loaded with pepperoni, ham, italian sausage, and bacon.
the vegetarian is overflowing with green peppers, onions, mushrooms, and roma tomatoes.
pepperoni lover's is topped with pepperoni, pepperoni, and more pepperoni.
this retro pie available now for a limited time at participating pizza hut locations nationwide for $12.
99, but prices may vary by location.
for more on the latest fast-food releases, check out:we tried popular new fast-food summer items and this is the best onethe worst new fast-food pizzas, according to a dietitian4 most exciting new chicken sandwiches everyone's trying right nowand don't forget to sign up for our newsletter to get the latest restaurant news delivered straight to your inbox.
bangkok: two ancient sandstone artefacts believed to have been stolen from thailand during the vietnam war were unveiled on monday (may 31) at a bangkok museum, greeted with a fanfare of traditional dancers and an elaborate worship ceremony.
the temple support beams which were returned on friday boast exquisite carvings of the hindu deities indra and yama that date back to the late 10th or 11th century.
they had been on display for decades at the san francisco asian art museum, and their repatriation to thailand followed a yearslong investigation by the us department of homeland security.
on monday, museum staff carefully unpacked the artefacts under the watchful gaze of culture minister itthiphol khunpluem as thai traditional music played.
"these two lintels are evidence of our rich and prosperous history dating back many centuries ago," he said, thanking us authorities and the thai foreign affairs ministry for the "relentless pursuit of the sandstones".
itthiphol also said the government is still deliberating whether they would be taken to smaller, local museums in the provinces of buriram and sa kaeo, which border neighbouring cambodia.
the lintels have features that mirror famed cambodian temples showing the influence and reach of the ancient khmer kingdom and are believed to have been stolen out of thailand between 1958 and 1969. as music blared, thai traditional dancers in gold-flecked dresses donning plastic face shields performed during the unveiling ceremony for the artefacts.
massive towers of fruit were also on display around flower wreaths an offering to the gods to protect the lintels.
itthiphol said there are still "13 more buddha statues and engraved artefacts waiting to be repatriated from the us".
the california museum had disputed investigators' allegations that the artefacts were stolen, and insisted it had long planned to return them.
us museums are not the only ones to be embroiled in art provenance scandals in recent years.
australia has repatriated at least eight looted statues to india since 2014. france has vowed to return items taken from senegal and benin, while the netherlands is moving to repatriate artefacts stolen from its former colonies.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
indiaworld
geneva: the head of the world health organization (who) called on monday (may 31) for launching negotiations this year on an international treaty to boost pandemic preparedness, as part of sweeping reforms envisioned by member states.
tedros adhanom ghebreyesus, who director-general, told its annual ministerial assembly that the u. n.  agency faced a "serious challenge" to maintain its covid-19 response at the current level and required sustainable and flexible funding.
earlier in the day the last of the week-long assembly health ministers agreed to study recommendations for ambitious reforms made by independent experts to strengthen the capacity of both the who and countries to contain new viruses.
the ministers from the who's 194 member states are to meet from nov.  29 to decide whether to launch negotiations on the pandemic treaty.
"the one recommendation that i believe will do most to strengthen both who and global health security is the recommendation for a treaty on pandemic preparedness and response," tedros said.
"this is an idea whose time has come.
"it could be a long road ahead if such a treaty is to be reached.
the who's framework convention on tobacco control the world's first public health treaty was clinched in 2003 after four years of negotiations.
the who, which has been at the heart of the world's sluggish response to the covid-19 pandemic, faces a potential shake-up to prevent future outbreaks.
under the resolution submitted by the european union, and adopted by consensus, member states are to be firmly in the driver's seat of the reforms through a year-long process.
"it's essential that we strengthen global (disease) surveillance and provide the world health organization with the authority and the capacity to do this important job for all the peoples of the world," australian prime minister scott morrison told the talks.
"if we are to deliver on this ambitious reform agenda, then we must work together and put other issues aside," he said.
the new virus has infected more than 170 million people and killed nearly 3.
7 million since emerging in china in late 2019, according to a reuters tally of official national figures.
"pathogens have the upper hand"who's emergencies director, mike ryan, welcomed the decisions, saying: "right now the pathogens have the upper hand, they are emerging more frequently and often silently in a planet that is out of balance.
"we need to turn that very thing that has exposed us in this pandemic, our interconnectedness, we need to turn that into a strength," he said.
chile's ambassador frank tressler zamorano said on behalf of 60 countries that a pandemic treaty would help "heed the call by so many experts to reset the system".
one panel, headed by former new zealand prime minister helen clark and ellen johnson sirleaf, a former president of liberia, said a new global system should be set up to respond faster to disease outbreaks to help ensure no future virus causes a pandemic as devastating as covid-19.
the experts, who found crucial failures in the global response in early 2020, said the who should be given the power to send investigators swiftly to chase down new disease outbreaks and to publish their full findings without delay.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore: malaysia's narcotics criminal investigation department (ncid) has busted a drug syndicate that smuggled drugs into singapore using modified fire extinguishers.
in a statement on tuesday (jun 1), the central narcotics bureau (cnb) said the operation was a result of intelligence information sharing between the bureau, malaysia's ncid and the johor police, citing johor police chief ayob khan mydin pitchay.
"motivated by profit, drug traffickers and syndicates will continue to take huge gambles to smuggle illicit drugs into singapore, and will stop at nothing to evade detection from the authorities," said cnb.
"the recent arrests in both malaysia and singapore are a testament to the close cooperation between the drug enforcement agencies in both countries.
"cnb said it would continue to work closely with malaysia's ncid to share timely intelligence and to secure singapore's borders against transnational drug trafficking activities.
on may 18, the cnb arrested seven people, aged 26 to 48, for suspected drug offences.
it also seized various drugs with a street value of close to s$850,000.
about 466g of heroin, which wasconcealed inside a fire extinguisher, was seized from a residential unit near jurong east ave 1. it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
"the singapore core cannot be anything other than singaporeans," said progress singapore party (psp) youth wing leader jess chua, referring to deputy prime minister heng swee keat's remarks earlier in may when he said that the "singapore core" should not be too narrowly defined in terms of whether someone is singapore-born, a new citizen, or a foreigner who is helming a company.
mr heng had said on 17 may at a press conference by the emerging stronger taskforce, "that test for us must be the commitment to singapore, the commitment to the well-being of singapore and of singaporeans," he said.
responding to this, ms chua took to facebook on 23 may to express her dismay over the dpm's comments and took issue with his choice of using "commitment" as a yardstick on who forms the singaporean core.
she wrote, "while certain commitments may span decades, others last a few years or even just a season.
"work commitment for example is rewarded with remuneration and ends once the employment contract ceases.
"on the other hand, citizenship is a life-long commitment that does not come with pre-negotiated benefits.
in most cases, people do not get to choose their citizenship – it is a natural bond often lasting a lifetime.
singapore citizens, natural or naturalised alike, must be the singapore core.
period.
"using chicken rice as an analogy, ms chua explained that while the chilli sauce add flavour, it is not the core of the dish which is the chicken and the rice.
in this analogy, citizens are the chicken and rice while foreigners are the chilli sauce.
she added, "a good chilli sauce merely complements the chicken rice but can never be the chicken rice itself.
""in the same vein, foreign labour complements our local workforce by supplying missing skillsets, or by filling up positions in sectors which the local workforce may be unsuited for.
"she went on to stress that non-singaporeans are not unimportant just because they do not make up the core of the nation, highlighting how they have been part of singapore's society and will continue to be called on to complement the local workforce.
where some may decide to sink in roots here, like ms chua's own mother, others may decide to return to their home countries.
when this happens, the country does not lose part of its core, she stressed.
"our singapore core is irreplaceable," ms chua emphasised, adding that government policies must be built around this core even if it may not produce quick results or not be more cost-effective in the short term.
in the earlier press conference, mr heng had said that in his own experience running the monetary authority of singapore (mas) during the 2008 to 2009 financial crises, many chief executives of international banks in singapore had given him outstanding advice on how to deal with the crisis, thus demonstrating that they had singapore's interest at heart.
he had said, "some of the ceos from these banks are as singaporean as singaporeans who were born in singapore and went through national service," adding that some of them eventually became citizens.
countering this, ms chua shared her own experience working with many non-singaporeans in her time at multinational companies, people who are "committed" to their work and "appreciative" of what singapore has to offer.
however, she added: "regardless of their abilities and level of contributions, none of them came to singapore out of altruism; they did not travel across countries merely wanting to help build singapore or boost our gross domestic product.
"they came here to seek better opportunities for themselves – and there is nothing wrong with that.
"while singapore benefited from their contributions, they in turned gained the means to lead better lives and/or to better provide for their own families.
"she cautioned, "the powers that be should not obfuscate the singapore identity to suit their political objectives," and emphasised that the singapore core cannot be anything other than singaporeans.
she also shared the 1978 national day parade theme song, "we are singapore, singaporeans", describing it as her favourite national day song for it's "meaningful, simple and unambiguous lyrics".
"now it serves as a beacon to be for what the singapore core should be," she concluded.
© 2006 2021 the online citizen© 2006 2021 the online citizen
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore motorists who break traffic rules in school zones and silver zones will face higher fines and additional demerit points from july 1. the fines for traffic offences in these areas, where there is a higher frequency of schoolchildren or the elderly, will be increased by $100, and drivers will also incur two additional demerit points for each offence, said the ministry of home affairs (mha) in a statement on tuesday (june 1).
those who go above the usual speed limit of 40kmh in silver zones, or in school zones when the"40kmh when lights flash" sign is flashing, will also be liable for the higher penalties.
mha said this move follows an increase in traffic accidents resulting in elderly pedestrian casualties from 223 in 2015 to 317 in 2019.  last year, the elderly made up more than 80 per cent of pedestrian fatalities.
"while jaywalking by elderly pedestrians contributed to some of these accidents, many accidents also arise from irresponsible driving behaviour on the motorist's part, such as failing to slow down when approaching a pedestrian crossing.
"the situation may be improved with greater care on the part of motorists," said mha.
for example, for failing to slow down or give way when approaching pedestrian crossings, offenders will incur eight demerit points, up from six, outside silver zones and school zones.
driving or riding against the flow of traffic in these zones will likewise incur eight demerit points instead of six.
composition fines for light vehicles will be $300, up from $200, and $350 for heavy vehicles, up from $250.
a motorist who runs a red light, which is a 12-demerit point offence when committed outside a silver zone and school zone, will incur 14 demerit points when committed in the zones.
the motorist can be fined $500 instead of $400 for all vehicles.
this is the maximum composition fine for all 12-demerit-point offences, which is capped at half of the maximum court fine of $1,000.
a composition fine allows an offence to be settled with a fine, without having to be convicted in court.
mha said it will monitor accident rates for heavy vehicles in silver zones and school zones, and review the cap on composition fines if necessary.
the stiffened measures for motorists in these zones come after other ongoing efforts by the traffic police to enhance road safety for elderly pedestrians.
these include public education for the elderly and enforcement measures for pedestrians at jaywalking hot spots.
the land transport authority has also included additional crossing points and lanes with reduced width to slow down traffic at silver zones.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
kalvin ho, one of the 47 pro-democracy activists charged under the national security law for participating in an unofficial primary election last year, was denied bail in march/afpdozens of leading hong kong democracy activists could face up to life in prison for organising an unofficial primary election, prosecutors confirmed monday, in the most sweeping use yet of beijing's strict new security law.
police charged the 47 activists with "subversion" after they organised a non-binding vote last year to choose candidates for an ultimately postponed local election.
the defendants say they were simply taking part in opposition politics.
but authorities accused them of a "vicious plot" to subvert the government by seeking a majority in the city's partially-elected legislature.
on monday the defendants appeared en masse for the first time in nearly three months at a hearing in which a judge granted a request by prosecutors to have the case upgraded to the city's high court.
offences heard in that court start at seven years imprisonment for those who are convicted.
the maximum penalty under the new security law is life in prison.
beijing has moved to quash dissent in the semi-autonomous city after huge and sometimes violent pro-democracy demonstrations in 2019. the security law criminalises anything authorities deem to be subversion, secession, terrorism or collusion with foreign forces.
police and prosecutors have since applied the law broadly with the vast majority of those charged for political speech.
under the new law — which beijing imposed directly on the city last june — defendants may only be granted bail if they can persuade a court they no longer pose any kind of national security risk.
that clause has removed hong kong's common law tradition that maintains a presumption of bail for non-violent crimes.
monday's proceedings were the first time the public was able to see most of the defendants since early march when the vast majority — 36 — were denied bail at a mammoth hearing.
that hearing dragged on for so many days that some of those in the dock collapsed from exhaustion.
bail decisions published since that hearing have revealed that judges are deciding whether some of those in custody still pose a potential security risk.
claudia mo, a former lawmaker, was denied bail partly because of whatsapp messages with foreign journalists in which she commented on news and political events.
another former lawmaker jeremy tam saw his application turned down in part because the united states consulate invited him by email for a "catch up" — even though the email went unanswered.
in both instances judges argued the fact that the two defendants remained influential meant denial of bail was needed.
china says the national security law is needed to restore stability.
critics say it has eviscerated the freedoms hong kong was promised ahead of its handover and has rapidly begun to change city's vaunted, business reliable common law traditions.
— afp © 2006 2021 the online citizen© 2006 2021 the online citizen
loading.
.
.
tuesday, 01 jun 2021 03:45 pm mytby sylvia looi

this year's tokyo olympics will see over 150,000 condoms being given away to athletes as souvenirs.
― picture by yusof mat isa

follow us on instagram and subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates.
kuala lumpur, june 1 ― this year's tokyo olympics will see more than 150,000 condoms given out to athletes as souvenirs of their time in japan.
however, the organiser is not encouraging the athletes to use it at the games village but to bring it back to their own countries.
quoting the games organiser, tokyo-based news site soranews24 reported that they wanted to raise awareness about sexually-transmitted diseases.
in other words, the olympic condoms are meant to be souvenirs from the competitors' time in japan, which they will enjoy using once they are back home.
the organising committee is said to be examining the specific distribution process, implying that perhaps they won't be given out until after the games are done and athletes are leaving the village.
it has been a tradition since the 1988 seoul olympics that athletes staying in the olympic village be provided with condoms.
the tokyo olympics is scheduled to start on july 23 with no spectators from overseas at its venues due to the covid-19 pandemic.
loading.
.
.
© 2021, malay mail, all rights reserved.
singapore: singapore is expanding its national covid-19 vaccination programme to include students, with registrations for more than 400,000 schoolchildren aged 12 and above to open on tuesday (jun 1).
theannouncement, made by prime minister lee hsien loong in a televised speech on monday, comes after the pfizer-biontech vaccine was approved by the health sciences authority for those aged 12 to 15 earlier this month.
the exercise will begin with graduating cohorts from secondary schools and at the pre-university levels, said the ministry of education (moe) in a separate press release.
slots will be available from jun 3. here are some frequently asked questions about the vaccination exercise for students and how they can get their jab.
q: how do i register for the vaccine for myself or my child?a: eligible students aged 18 and above as well as parents of children below 18 will progressively receive smses with a unique registration link, said the education ministry.
graduating cohorts from secondary schools and at the pre-university levels in particular, students sitting for the gce n-, o- or a-level examinations later this year will be the first to receive the vaccination invitation.
over the next two weeks, the remaining full-time students in schools and institutes of higher learning will receive their invitations to register for the vaccine, said the education ministry.
this includes privately-funded schools, madrasahs and special education schools, said moe in the press release.
privately-funded schools comprise anglo-chinese school (international), st joseph's institution international high school and hwa chong international school.
parents of students in graduating cohorts who do not receive the sms by jun 3 should contact their children's school for assistance.
"schools will also be reaching out to parents of students in mainstream primary and secondary schools separately with additional details on their vaccinations.
in general, students who are in schools and the institutes of higher learning should receive their smses by the end of the second week of june," said moe in a factsheet.
sms invites will only be sent to parents or guardians of children who are 12 years old as of jun 1.  students whose 12th birthday fall after jun 1 will be invited for their vaccination at a later date, said moe.
q: can i choose which vaccine i want to take?a: students below 18 will only be offered the pfizer-biontech covid-19 vaccine, while those aged 18 and above can opt for either vaccine from pfizer-biontech or moderna, said the education ministry.
for both vaccines, the interval between the first and second dose will be six to eight weeks.
q: where can i get vaccinated?a: eligible students can get their jabs at community vaccination centres.
there will also be four dedicated moe vaccination centres set up at raffles city convention centre, ite college central, ite college east and ite college west, said moe.
ite will arrange for their students to take their vaccinations on campus.
each ite centre will have up to 1,600 vaccination slots per day, "comparable" to community vaccination centres, while raffles convention centre can take up to 2,000 slots per day, said moe in a briefing on monday.
the ministry will also deploy mobile vaccination teams to special education schools to "facilitate access" for eligible students who may find it challenging to visit a vaccination centre.
q: will parents be allowed to accompany their child to the vaccination centre?a: parents are required to accompany their child to the vaccination centre if they are below 13 years old.
parents of students aged 13 and above are not required to be present.
should they choose to do so, however, they will be asked to wait at a family area outside the vaccination room to avoid congestion and ensure compliance with safe management measures.
students in special education schools must also be accompanied by a parent or guardian.
parental or guardian consent is also required for students below 18, as part of the booking process for the vaccination slots through the national appointment system, said moe.
consent given via the system will be collected once, and will apply for both doses of the vaccine.
q: what happens if i miss my vaccination appointment?
will i be allowed to make another appointment?a: students who miss their first vaccination appointment during the moe vaccination exercise will be able to reschedule when the vaccination is open to the public for their age bands, said the ministry in the factsheet.
if students miss their second vaccination appointment, they should contact moh at 1800 333 9999 for further assistance.
q: what if my vaccination appointment clashes with my upcoming oral national examinations?a: if students' upcoming oral national examination schedules clash with their appointment dates for the first or second dose of their vaccination, changes to their oral examination dates within the examination window can be accommodated where possible, said the education ministry.
new appointment dates for the vaccination can also be scheduled.
special consideration may be applicable if rescheduling is not possible, and parents or students should provide evidence of the vaccination appointment to facilitate this, said moe.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
how they can help in wealth creationtomorrow is different.
let's reshape it todaylet's get smarter about money#toughertogetherhunt for the brightest engineers in indiamental health awareness initiativethe dynamic duo of a holistic self-caretrending nowpopular categorieshot on webin case you missed itet verticalsmore from our networkother useful linksserviceslog in/connect with:will be displayedwill not be displayedwill be displayed
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
beijing (afp, reuters) china reported the world's first human infection of the h10n3 bird flu strain on tuesday (june 1) but said the risk of it spreading widely among people was low.
the man, a resident of the city of zhenjiang, was hospitalised on april 28 after developing a fever and other symptoms, the nhc said in a statement.
he was diagnosed as having the h10n3 avian influenza virus on may 28, it said, but did not give details on how the man had been infected with the virus.
"the risk of large-scale spread is extremely low," the nhc said, adding that the man was in a stable condition and his close contacts had reported no "abnormalities".
it described h10n3 as low pathogenic less likely to cause death or severe illness in birds.
the man was stable and ready to be discharged from hospital.
medical observation of his close contacts had not found any other cases.
the nhc said there had been no human cases of h10n3 previously reported in the world.
h10n3 is a low pathogenic, or relatively less severe, strain of the virus in poultry and the risk of it spreading on a large scale was very low, the nhc added.
the strain is "not a very common virus", said filip claes, regional laboratory coordinator of the food and agriculture organisation's emergency centre for transboundary animal diseases at the regional office for asia and the pacific.
only around 160 isolates of the virus were reported in the 40 years to 2018, mostly in wild birds or waterfowl in asia and some limited parts of north america, and none had been detected in chickens so far, he added.
analysing the genetic data of the virus will be necessary to determine whether it resembles older viruses or if it is a novel mix of different viruses, claes said.
several strains of bird flu have been found among animals in china but mass outbreaks in humans are rare.
the last human epidemic of bird flu in china occurred in late 2016 to 2017, with the h7n9 virus.
the h7n9 has infected 1,668 people and claimed 616 lives since 2013, according to the united nations' food and agriculture organisation.
following recent avian flu outbreaks in africa and eurasia, the head of china's centre for disease control and prevention last week urged stricter surveillance in poultry farms, markets and wild birds.
covid-19 was first detected at a food and animal market in the central chinese city of wuhan in late 2019. join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore: more than 400,000 students aged 12 and above will be invited to register for the covid-19 vaccine from jun 1, announced minister for education chan chun sing on monday (may 31).
this comes after the pfizer-biontech vaccine was approved by the health sciences authority for those aged 12 to 15 earlier this month.
bookings will open on jun 1, with the earliest slots for vaccination available from jun 3, said mr chan.
the exercise will start with graduating cohorts from secondary schools and at the pre-university levels, in particular, students sitting for the gce n-, o- or a-level examinations later this year, said the ministry of education (moe) in a separate press release.
"these students will be the first to receive their invitations to be vaccinated so that they can have greater flexibility in scheduling their vaccination appointments in view of their upcoming national examinations," the press release read.
over the next two weeks, the remaining full-time students in schools and institutes of higher learning will receive their invitations to register for the vaccine, said the education ministry.
this includes privately-funded schools, madrasahs and special education schools, said moe in the press release.
privately-funded schools comprise anglo-chinese school (international), st.  joseph's institution international high school and hwa chong international school.
students below 18 will only be offered the pfizer-biontech covid-19 vaccine, while those aged 18 and above can opt for either vaccines from pfizer-biontech or moderna, said the education ministry.
for both vaccines, the interval between the first and second dose will be six to eight weeks, said moe in a briefing earlier on monday.
eligible students aged 18 and above as well as parents of children below 18 will progressively receive smses with a unique registration link, said the ministry.
parents of students in graduating cohorts who do not receive the sms by jun 3 should contact their children's school for assistance.
"schools will also be reaching out to parents of students in mainstream primary and secondary schools separately with additional details on their vaccinations.
in general, students who are in schools and the ihls should receive their smses by the end of the second week of june," the factsheet read.
sms invites will only be sent to parents or guardians of children who are 12 years old as of jun 1.  those whose 12th birthday falls after jun 1 will be invited for vaccination at a later date, said moe.
parental or guardian consent is required for students below 18, as part of the booking process for the vaccination slots through the national appointment system, said the ministry.
consent given via the system will be collected once and will apply for both doses of the vaccine.
parents or guardians of students aged 13 and above do not need to accompany the child to the vaccination centre while children who are 12 years old and all students in special education schools must be accompanied by a parent or guardian.
eligible students can get vaccinated at community vaccination centres.
there will also be four dedicated moe vaccination centres set up at raffles city convention centre, ite college central, ite college east and ite college west, said moe.
ite will arrange for their students to take their vaccinations on campus to make use of the dedicated capacity, the ministry added.
each ite centre can take up to 1,600 vaccination slots per day, "comparable" to community vaccination centres, while raffles convention centre can take up to 2,000 slots per day, said moe in a briefing earlier on monday.
the ministry will also deploy a mobile vaccination team to special education schools to carry out the vaccinations for all eligible special education students, to "facilitate access" for students who might find it challenging to visit a vaccination centre, it said.
the vaccination exercise for students is expected to be completed by august, said moe at the briefing earlier on monday.
"all medically eligible individuals are encouraged to consider getting vaccinated when the vaccination is offered to them.
and we would like to thank all parents for working closely with our educators and schools to keep our children safe," said mr chan.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore dengue cases here are expected to increase, as the population of the aedes aegypti mosquito which transmits dengue and other viruses has grown by about 30 per cent in april, compared with january, said the national environment agency on tuesday (june 1).
the mosquito population has remained high in some residential areas across the island, including clementi west street 1, hougang avenue 6, 8 and 10, jurong east street 32, mei chin road, mei ling street, and stirling road.
over 2,700 dengue cases have been reported since the start of this year and there are currently 22 active dengue clusters.
although there have been fewer dengue cases in recent weeks than in the same period last year when a historic outbreak of dengue occurred in singapore the figures remain higher than those of 2017 and 2018 , years that saw 2,772 and 3,285 cases respectively.
there were 35,315 reported dengue cases last year, with 28 deaths.
"as we have now entered the warmer months of the year from june to october, the increased risk of higher dengue transmission is a concern," said the agency.
the nea therefore expects an increasing number of dengue cases due to the accelerated breeding cycle and maturation of the aedes aegypti mosquito vectors meaning it takes less time for the mosquito to become a biting adult in warmer months as well as the shorter incubation period of the dengue virus.
this refers to the time needed for the mosquito to pick up the disease and pass it on.
according to the world health organisation, this period is around eight to 12 days when the temperature is 25 to 28 deg c. since the covid-19 phase two (heightened alert) measures kicked in on may 16, the nea said that more people staying in and working from home could mean more " biting opportunities" for the day-biting aedes aegypti mosquito, and potentially higher risk of dengue transmission.
last august, a study examining the impact of the circuit breaker on the number of dengue infections found there were 50 per cent more cases than usual.
the study, which was conducted in collaboration with the national university of singapore's saw swee hock school of public health, also found that adults aged 20 to 64 made up the majority of infections, since that part of the population would have normally been in the workplace during the day.
in addition, more than half of the positive dengue samples since february were of the less common dengue serotypes 3 (denv-3) and 4 (denv-4).
serotypes are distinct variations within a particular virus.
there are four dengue serotypes: denv-1, 2, 3 and 4.  the predominant dengue virus serotype in singapore has been denv-2 since 2016. the nea said that since denv-3 has not been dominant for about the last three decades and the incidence rate of denv-4 has also been consistently low, the population immunity for both serotypes is low, making people more likely to get infected.
however, it added that it is too early to say that there has been a switch of dominant dengue virus serotype in singapore.
the denv-3 serotype has been detected in the dengue cluster at cashew terrace and hazel park terrace, while denv-4 has been detected in clusters at hougang central and pasir ris street 21.
"if left unchecked, the high aedes aegypti mosquito population, coupled with the circulation of previously uncommon dengue virus serotypes and a sizeable proportion of people.
.
.
working from home, would add to the dengue risk this year," said the nea.
it urged the public to prevent mosquito breeding by ensuring that stagnant water is removed.
in the meantime, the nea will continue to conduct inspections in areas with higher mosquito population, and has stepped up its operations in dengue cluster areas.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
bonghwa, south korea (afp) hidden in a south korean mountain tunnel designed to withstand a nuclear blast, the seeds of nearly 5,000 wild plant species are stored for safekeeping against climate change, natural disaster and war.
plant extinction is progressing at an alarming rate, researchers warn, driven by increasing human population, pollution and deforestation, even before many species are catalogued.
the baekdudaegan national arboretum seed vault centre preserves nearly 100,000 seeds from 4,751 different wild plant species to ensure they are not lost to "apocalyptic events", said centre head lee sang-yong.
it is one of only two such facilities in the world, he said.
unlike more commonplace seed banks, where samples are stored and regularly withdrawn for various purposes, deposits in seed vaults are meant to be permanent, with use intended only as a last resort to prevent extinction.
the vault is designated as a security installation by south korea's national intelligence service, surrounded by wire fences and dozens of cameras, with restrictions on filming in place and police patrolling on a regular basis.
inside, a lift leads about eight floors down to a cavernous concrete tunnel, where two heavy steel doors guard the storage room and its hand-cranked shelving racks, kept at minus 20 deg c to preserve the seeds and 40 per cent humidity to keep them viable.
the vault's samples are largely of flora from the korean peninsula, but with a capacity of two million seeds, the south makes its space available to other countries, with kazakhstan and tajikistan among those to have taken up the offer.
depositors retain ownership of their samples and control over withdrawals.
but mr lee pointed out: "the seed vault stores seeds to prevent their extinction, so the best scenario would be that the seeds never have to be taken out.
"despite its doomsday-defying role, it was built by a country that in 1950 was invaded by the neighbouring north, and pyongyang has since developed a nuclear and missile arsenal.
the facility was built in the "safest spot" in south korea, mr lee said, and designed to withstand a 6.
9-magnitude earthquake and even an atomic strike.
"it's geographically very safe," he said.
"and we paved a 46m-deep underground tunnel to ensure it's safe from war and nuclear threats.
"the world's biggest and best-known seed vault is buried deep inside a former coal mine in svalbard, a remote arctic norwegian archipelago around 1,300km from the north pole.
dubbed the "noah's ark" of food crops, the global seed vault focuses on agricultural and related plants, storing more than one million seed samples from nearly every country on the planet.
but researchers say preserving the seeds of wild plants the original source of the crops we eat today should not be overlooked.
a researcher preparing seed samples at the wild plant seeds research division of the baekdudaegan national arboretum in bonghwa, south korea, on may 21, 2021.  photo: afp
many crop relatives in the wild that could provide genetic diversity to help long-term food security "lack effective protection", according to a recent united nations report.
it warned that farming was likely to be less resilient against climate change, pests and pathogens as a result, adding: "the biosphere, upon which humanity as a whole depends.
.
.
is declining faster than at any time in human history.
"wild plants hold promise as future medicines, fuels and food, said the royal botanic gardens in kew, london, in a report last year, but around two-fifths of them are threatened with extinction, largely due to habitat destruction and climate change.
it was a "race against time" to identify them before they disappeared, it added.
research on wild plant seeds is "lacking tremendously", said senior researcher na chae-sun at the baekdudaegan national arboretum.
a researcher checking boxes containing seeds at the baekdudaegan national arboretum seed vault centre in bonghwa, south korea, on may 21, 2021.  photo: afp
she and her team collect samples and carry out a meticulous and extensive process, including x-ray tests and trial plantations, before seeds are catalogued and stored in the seed vault.
"one might ask why is that wild flower on the kerbside important?"
she said.
"our job is to identify these one by one and letting people know how important they are," she went on.
"the crops that we eat today may have come from that nameless flower on the kerbside.
"join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
the majority of nestlé's traditional food and drinks do not meet a "recognised definition of health.
"just 37% of its consumer food and beverage products meet international health standards.
the global food company acknowledged the issue in an internal presentation seen by the financial times.
see more stories on insider's business page.
more than 60% of nestlé's traditional packaged consumer food and beverage products do not meet an internationally recognized health standard, according to internal company documents seen by the financial times.
"some of our categories and products will never be 'healthy' no matter how much we renovate," the company said in a presentation seen by top executives at the world's largest food conglomerate.
ceo mark schneider told bloomberg in september that the company is making continued investments in the healthiness of its products, but "confectionary and chocolate address a deep human need and are going to be here to stay.
"the definition of "healthy" comes from the australian health star rating system, which scores products on a five-star scale and is used by international researchers including the access to nutrition foundation.
a product must score at least 3.
5 stars to be considered healthy.
metrics like the health star system "enable consumers to make informed choices.
however, they don't capture everything," a company spokesperson said in a statement to insider.
"about half of our sales are not covered by these systems.
that includes categories such as infant nutrition, specialized health products and pet food, which follow regulated nutrition standards.
""we believe that a healthy diet means finding a balance between well-being and enjoyment.
this includes having some space for indulgent foods, consumed in moderation," the spokesperson added.
the presentation highlighted the stats of some of the most unhealthy products made and sold by nestlé-owned brands.
a serving of hot pockets pepperoni pizza packs a whopping 48 percent of the daily sodium allowance, followed closely by digiorno's three meat croissant crust pizza, which has 40 percent.
to pair saltiness with sweetness, nestlé also offers an orange-flavored san pellegrino drink with 7.
1g of sugar per 100ml, and nesquik's strawberry-flavored milk powder with 14g of sugar in a 14g serving.
"strawberry nesquik is perfect at breakfast to get kids ready for the day," nestlé says in its marketing text for the product.
"we have made significant improvements to our products .
.
.
[but] our portfolio still underperforms against external definitions of health in a landscape where regulatory pressure and consumer demands are skyrocketing," the presentation said.
professor marion nestle (no relation), who researches nutritional science at cornell, told the ft that a healthy portfolio is likely out of reach for large publicly traded companies like nestlé.
"food companies' job is to generate money for stockholders, and to generate it as quickly and in as large an amount as possible," she said.
"they are going to sell products that reach a mass audience and are bought by as many people as possible, that people want to buy, and that's junk food.
""nestlé is a very smart company, at least from my meetings with people who are in their science [departments] .
.
.
but they have a real problem," she added.
"scientists have been working for years to try to figure out how to reduce the salt and sugar content without changing the flavor profile and guess what, it's hard to do.
"read the original article on business insiderby now we all know that diet culture is such a pervasive phenomenon that even during a completely unprecedented time in many of our lifetimes (like a global pandemic), people are still obsessed with weight gain.
there are two sides to this coin: those who make jokey remarks about how "fat" they're going to get [.
.
.
]the federal minimum wage has remained at $7.
25 per hour for the past decade, but some major companies have taken it upon themselves to up their lowest wage earners' compensation to more than double.
.
.
《!》ut,!are we just going to let history repeat itself like this?household members of any person identified as a close contact of a  covid-19 case will have to isolate themselves immediately, even if the person has not tested positive for covid-19 yet.
the leader of israel's right wing yamina party, naftali bennett, said in a speech sunday he'll do everything in his power to form a unity government with opposition leader yair lapid "to get the country back on the right track.
"why it matters: a new "change government" could end the political crisis that has led to four elections in israel in two years.
it would make bennett prime minister, bringing an end to 12 years of benjamin netanyahu's rule.
stay on top of the latest market trends and economic insights with axios markets.
subscribe for freewhat he's saying: bennett, who called lapid his "friend", in the speech accused netanyahu of lying when he says he can form a right wing government with 61 members of the legislature.
he added that the alternative to a unity government was a fifth election, which he said would lead to a sixth and seventh election.
"this will tear apart our country brick by brick until our house collapses on us", bennett said.
"mr.  netanyahu is not trying to form a right wing government.
he knows it's impossible.
he wants to take the country to his own personal masada," bennett said.
he said netanyahu was operating a "well-oiled machine that is spreading lies to sow fear in the public.
"bennett stressed the new unity government will not be left-wing, and that it wouldn't give up territories or hesitate to go on a military operation if one is needed.
"the left wing part of the government made big compromises .
.
.
each side of the government will have a veto power and equal number of votes", bennett said.
the other side: netanyahu gave a statement shortly after bennett's speech, calling him a liar and "the con artist of the century. "
he called on right wing voters to put pressure on the members of knesset from bennett's party so that they don't vote in favor of the new government.
worth noting: under a "change government," bennett would serve as prime minister for two years before lapid rotates into the job.
it would be the most wide-ranging coalition ever formed in israel.
what's next: bennett's and lapid's negotiations teams convened right after the speech.
lapid and bennett were already on the verge of a deal three weeks ago when talks suspended over the gaza operation.
both of them want to finish negotiations by monday or tuesday, and notify president rivlin that they managed to form a government.
the swearing in of the government could take place no more than a week later.
more from axios: sign up to get the latest market trends with axios markets.
subscribe for freehk$0,hk$10,000 apple store.
.
.
step aside, heat tools.
rangers who keep an eye on north america's highest mountain peak say impatient and inexperienced climbers are taking more risks and endangering themselves and other climbers after a year off because of the covid-19 pandemic.
denali in southern alaska is 20,310 feet (6,190 meters) above sea level and requires a level of expertise and acclimation to high altitudes not needed for climbing most peaks in the u. s.   "we have seen a disturbing amount of overconfidence paired with inexperience in the alaska range," the national park service wrote in a statement issued thursday.
detectives have their hands full with several recent attacks on the subway, one of them on the upper east side and several others in queens.
,,,,!capitol hill staffers: show us your monthly budget on a congressional salarykyrie irving walked to midcourt and stomped on the celtics' logo after helping the nets to victory in game 4. mayim bialik, who starred in "the big bang theory" and holds a doctorate in neuroscience, guest-hosted "jeopardy!"
episodes that air through june 11. all asset classes.
industry-leading prices.
user-friendly investing online.
a belarusian activist is in hospital after he tried to slit his own throat in court, telling his father he was being forced to confess.
the man's suicide attempt on tuesday horrified belarus, a nation deeply traumatised by police violence and torture following alexander lukashenko's win in a rigged vote last summer.
stsiapan latypau is one of over 400 belarusians jailed since the election for their opposition views.
mr latypau, charged with resisting police and fraud, was brought into a minsk cotrump has told people, baselessly, that he "expects he will get reinstated by august," the new york times reporter maggie haberman tweeted.
"i was not involved that much.
anybody who said that is full of shit," hannity told wsj's michael bender.
play for just 1 minute to find out why everyone loves this game!
no install requiredwashington (reuters) -the u. s.  supreme court on tuesday declined to hear johnson & johnson's bid to overturn a $2.
12 billion damages award to women who blamed their ovarian cancer on asbestos in the company's baby powder and other talc products.
the justices turned away a j&j appeal and left in place a missouri state court ruling in litigation brought by 22 women whose claims were heard together in one trial.
the missouri court of appeals, an intermediate state appellate court, last year ruled against j&j's bid to throw out the compensatory and punitive damages awarded to the plaintiffs but reduced the total to $2.
12 billion from the $4.
69 billion originally decided by a jury.
trump has reportedly been telling people he'll be 'reinstated' by augustbelgian ambassador to south korea peter lescouhier's wife was seen on security footage slapping an employee at a clothing store last month.
here is what whole mouth dental implants should cost you in your areaa sicilian mafia boss known as "the pig" and "the people-slayer", who had a child dissolved in acid as revenge against an informant, has been released early from prison, prompting outrage from his victims' relatives.
giovanni brusca, 64, a former leader of cosa nostra, was released from a high security jail in rome after spending 25 years behind bars for multiple murders and mafia association.
he was notorious for having detonated the huge roadside bomb that blew up a crusading anti-mafia prosecutor, giovanni falcone, in 1992.  brusca told a court how he sat on the side of a hill, watching the progress of the prosecutor's convoy through a pair of binoculars, before activating the explosion by remote control.
the prosecutor's wife and three police protection officers also died in the massive explosion, which happened on a stretch of motorway outside palermo.
brusca ordered the kidnapping of 12-year-old giuseppe di matteo in revenge for the boy's father deciding to become a pentito or informant, offering to collaborate with police and prosecutors.
the boy was kidnapped, held in squalid and inhuman conditions for more than two years, then strangled and dissolved in acid.
ina garten's simple weeknight bolognese is packed with rich flavors, while her lemon pasta only takes 10 minutes to whip up.
fox news' sean hannity reportedly wrote a trump campaign ad that aired on his show
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore seniors began showing up at vaccination centres from early tuesday morning (june 1), a day after prime minister lee hsien loong said that those aged 60 and above can walk into any centre and get their covid-19 jab on the spot.
among them were some who had initially been reluctant to do so, such as madam lee kwee wah, 74.
"i did not want to take the vaccination previously, so i didn't take it," the retiree told the straits times.
"no particular reason.
"madam lee changed her mind after encouragement from her daughter, following pm lee's appeal to those in her age group.
"my eldest daughter said it is better for me to take it, so i took it," she said.
around three-quarters of those over 60 have had at least one dose or made an appointment to get vaccinated, leaving around 280,000 who have not.
apart from being allowed to get vaccinated without having to make an advance appointment, people in this age group can now also request to receive their jabs at home if they are not mobile or unable to get to a centre.
students have been asked to register for vaccination, while adults under 39 will likely start getting jabbed in mid-june.
on tuesday, president halimah yacob urged seniors to quickly get inoculated against covid-19, especially since the process has been made more convenient for them to do so.
"our seniors have always been the priority of the government in our effort to protect our people against covid-19, as they are more vulnerable, and we would like to see all of them vaccinated," she said in a facebook post on tuesday (june 1).
the president acknowledged that some may have concerns about side effects.
"the vaccine is safe, and the strongest testimony to that is the 760,000 who are already vaccinated," she said, adding that she and her husband both in their 60s have also received their shots.
madam halimah also urged neighbours or friends to help seniors who may not have family to assist them with the vaccination process.
"grassroots organisations or social service agencies can also assist," she said.
"in this way, hopefully we can see all our seniors quickly vaccinated.
"the straits times visited three vaccination centres located at community clubs (ccs) on tuesday, all of which saw seniors walking in to get their shots.
at radin mas cc, around 10 seniors arrived at 7.
30am without appointments, while at marsiling cc, around eight such seniors had trickled in by noon.
tanjong pagar cc saw 21 such walk-ins by 1pm.
one senior, 64-year-old chua ah poh, said she missed her vaccination appointment in april because she had been unwell.
the cleaner said she decided to go to the centre this afternoon to receive her jab after hearing pm lee's pitch on monday and also with encouragement from her family.
she said in mandarin: "all my family members have received the vaccination, so i think it's better for me to get it as soon as possible to be safe and prevent anything from happening. "
madam lee kwee wah (left) did not want to take the vaccination previously but changed her mind after encouragement from her daughter.
st photo: ng sor luan
she encouraged her unvaccinated peers to get jabbed as well, adding: "it is safer to get the vaccination, not just for yourself, but also for the well-being of all singaporeans.
"another senior, retiree liew ho far, 70, said: "i feel safer after taking the vaccination.
but its not just that, we must also take preventive measures, such as going out less often and wearing a mask when going out.
we have to take our life in our own hands.
"mr liew said he had cancelled his previous vaccination appointment because he was hospitalised at the time.
he also encouraged other senior citizens to receive the vaccination, saying in mandarin: "i will encourage them to take the vaccination because it is safe and there is nothing to be afraid of.
"join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
indiaworld
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
two more covid-19 patients have been linked to the anchorvale ntuc foodfare cluster, and another four have been linked to the hong ye group cleaners cluster, said the ministry of health (moh) yesterday.
they are among the 16 community cases.
of these, 13 are linked to previous cases 11 of whom have been placed on quarantine.
the number of patients in the anchorvale ntuc foodfare cluster has gone up to nine, while the hong ye group cleaners cluster now numbers 21. the new cases in the ntuc foodfare cluster are a 33-year-old supervisor at hua zai hk style roasted delight rice noodle he is the household contact of five previously reported patients as well as a 33-year-old kitchen assistant at hua zai hk style roasted delights.
both work in outlets at 308 anchorvale road, a coffee shop that has been closed for two weeks since sunday due to viral transmission among workers there.
the kitchen assistant also works at another outlet at 476d upper serangoon view.
the four new members of the hong ye group cluster are an 18-year-old cleaner at changi business park, an 18-year-old full-time national serviceman, an unemployed 16-year-old and an 11-year-old pupil at new town primary school.
separately, a 60-year-old female administrative worker at white sands primary school was one of three unlinked patients reported yesterday.
she took the vaccine on march 20 and april 10. a 68-year-old male singaporean who works as a manager at phoenix entertainment karaoke tv music lounge and whose serology test was positive and a 72-year-old singaporean housewife were the other two unlinked cases.
a positive serology test indicates a likely past infection.
a nine-year-old pupil at chua chu kang primary school, who was asymptomatic, also tested positive for the virus.
she is linked to a cluster whose first detected case was a 15-year-old boy from westwood secondary school.
new cases: 23in community: 16 (3 unlinked)in dormitories: 0imported: 7new community cases in the past week: 128(26 unlinked)active cases: 559in hospitals: 223 (2 in icu)in community facilities: 336deaths: 33total discharged: 61,444discharged yesterday: 25total cases: 62,051she also attends student care at happy star learning hub student care and tuition centre.
there were also seven imported cases who had been placed on stay-home notice on arrival in singapore.
four of the imported cases are singaporeans or permanent residents.
no new cases from workers' dormitories were reported.
this adds up to a total of 23 coronavirus cases confirmed yesterday, which take singapore's total cases to 62,051. overall, the number of new cases in the community has fallen to 128 in the past week, from 185 two weeks ago.
unlinked cases in the community have also fallen to 26 in the past week, from 32 the week before.
with 25 more patients discharged yesterday, 61,444 patients have fully recovered from the disease.
a total of 223 patients remain in hospital, including two in critical condition in the intensive care unit, while 336 are recuperating in community facilities.
singapore has had 33 deaths from covid-19 complications, while 15 who tested positive have died of other causes.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore has "ample supply of food and essential items" but people should buy only what they need, said minister for trade and industry gan kim yong on monday (may 31), on the back of supply concerns arising from malaysia's two-week lockdown.
singapore:  singapore has "ample supply of food and essential items" but people should buy only what they need, said minister for trade and industry gan kim yong on monday (may 31).
mr gan's comments came on the back of supply concerns arising frommalaysia's two-week lockdownfrom jun 1 to jun 14.  singapore imports several products from malaysia, including chicken, fish and vegetables.
"we are working with malaysia to ensure the continued flow of essential supplies between our two countries," said mr gan, speaking at a covid-19 multi-ministry task force.
the government has been working closely with relevant agencies and companies to build up existing stock, further diversify its sources of food and essential items while also increasing local production, he said.
"i want to assure everyone that we have ample supply of food and essential items.
but please remember to only buy what you need," said mr gan, who is also co-chair of the task force.
economic agencies in singapore are working with companies, especially those dealing with essential goods and services, to minimise disruptions to their supply lines, he added.
mr gan visited supermarket chain fairprice and home-grown supply chain solutions company ych over the weekend to better understand the measures that have been put in place to ensure that there is sufficient food and essential items for all, he said.
describing the covid-19 situation as "extremely fluid", mr gan said that as the pandemic continues to evolve globally, singapore must remain prepared and vigilant as a nation while staying flexible and adaptable.
speaking after prime minister lee hsien loong's address on singapore's strategy against covid-19, mr gan said that the next few months are "critical".
"we are in a race with the virus.
the virus will attempt to spread wider and faster, and therefore we need to do more and do faster too, in vaccination, testing and contact tracing," he said.
impact expected to be "modest"touching on the potential impact of the tighter covid-19 restrictions during phase 2 (heightened alert) on singapore's economy, mr gan said that he expects the overall impact to be modest.
"the impact of the measures will differ across different sectors.
domestic, consumer-oriented sectors, such as food and beverage services, retail, and land transport, will see a greater impact," he added.
"on the other hand, the impact of these measures on outward-oriented sectors of the economy, such as manufacturing and finance and insurance, is likely to be less severe.
"last friday, finance minister lawrence wong announcedmore support measuresfor businesses affected by the tightened measures, extending wage subsidies to more sectors.
"even as we do our best to manage the situation at hand, mti will continue to give businesses, our full support to help them transform and seize new opportunities when they arise," said mr gan.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
a teenager who was fatally stabbed was chased down a road by a group shortly before his death, police believe.
detectives from west midlands police said they have been making rapid progress as they continue to appeal for information following the stabbing on monday, may 31. the 14-year-old is believed to have been chased on college road in kingstanding by a number of people in the direction of mcdonald's.
he is then believed to have been stabbed by one of the youths before collapsing into the road, and he was pronounced dead a short time later.
detective chief inspector stu mobberley, leading the investigation, said: "we've made rapid progress in the investigation already and are following up a number of really strong lines of enquiry.
"we know there tensions and emotions are high, and we're aware that there is some speculation in the community that this was a racially motivated attack.
"at the moment, there is nothing to suggest that this is a racially motivated attack.
"what we do know is that this was appalling violence which has cost a young lad his life.
"we still have witnesses to speak to, and i'd urge anyone with information to get in touch with us as quickly as possible so that we can arrest those involved in this appalling attack.
"anyone with information has been asked to get in touch via live chat at west-midlands.
police.
uk, or crimestoppers anonymously on 0800 555 111. by james vukmiroviccommunity reporter@jamesvukmiroviccommunity reporter at the express & star, helping under-represented communities to find a voice in wolverhampton.
contact me at james.
vukmirovic@expressandstar.
co. uk.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
more than 400,000 students will be invited to book their covid-19 jabs from today, with priority given to secondary and pre-university students in graduating cohorts, education minister chan chun sing announced yesterday.
the roll-out of the vaccination drive for younger people comes amid more cases of schoolchildren getting infected in settings like tuition centres in the recent covid-19 outbreak, and the earliest vaccine slots will be from thursday.
since april 15, more than 70 students in pre-schools, schools and institutes of higher learning have tested positive for the virus, forcing some schools to switch to home-based learning even before nationwide restrictions to curb community spread kicked in on may 16. prime minister lee hsien loong said yesterday: "the children were not seriously ill, but parents are naturally worried.
therefore, we will take advantage of the june holidays to vaccinate students.
"for a start, the exercise will kick off with the 56,000 students who will be sitting the n, o and a levels, as well as other equivalent qualifications such as the international baccalaureate diploma, in the second half of this year, so they can schedule their vaccination appointments ahead of the upcoming national exams, the ministry of education (moe) said.
over the next two weeks, the invitations will be progressively extended to other full-time students, including those in madrasahs and special education (sped) schools.
students who are 18 and above will receive an sms containing a unique link for them to book a slot for the first dose of the vaccine at any of the vaccination centres around singapore.
the second dose will be given around six to eight weeks later.
for children under 18, who will need parental consent to take the jabs, the sms invitations will be sent to their parents or guardians.
those below 13 will have to be accompanied by their parents or guardians during their jab.
while singapore offers both the pfizer and moderna vaccines, only those aged 18 and above will be given a choice between the two.
this is because the moderna jab has not been approved for use with the younger age group.
those aged between 12 and 17 will be offered only the pfizer jab, which was recently cleared for use for those aged 12 to 15 following an evaluation by the health sciences authority.
the well-being of our students and educators is foremost to the confidence of our parents in our schools.
moe's intention is to have as many of our eligible students vaccinated as soon as possible when vaccines are available.
to address parents' questions and concerns about the vaccines, moe will be partnering with the ministry of health to organise webinars for them, said mr chan.
primary school leaving examination•oral exams: aug 12 to 13•listening comprehension: sept 17•written exams: sept 30 to oct 6n levels•oral exams: july 12 to 16, july 29 to aug 2•listening comprehension: sept 13 to 14•written exams: sept 15 to oct 14o levels•oral exams: july 7 to 16, july 22 to aug 13, sept 27 to oct 6•listening comprehension: july 6, oct 11, oct 13, oct 15•written exams (mother tongue and chinese/malay/ tamil b): may 31 to june 1•written exams (other subjects): oct 8 to nov 15a levels•oral exams: july 7 to 21, oct 6, oct 12 to 14•listening comprehension: july 6, oct 18 to 19, nov 1•written exams (mother tongue and chinese/malay/ tamil b): may 31 to june 1•written exams (other subjects): oct 11 to dec 3note: exact dates will depend on individual subjects taken by studentsmeanwhile, four dedicated moe vaccination centres will be set up from next monday to support the vaccination roll-out for students.
they include three centres at the institute of technical education (ite) college campuses in ang mo kio, choa chu kang and simei, and one at the raffles city convention centre.
the ite centres will be able to administer 1,600 doses of the vaccine a day, while the raffles city centre can do 2,000 doses a day.
ite will arrange for its students to take their shots on campus, and the ministry of health will send mobile vaccination teams to sped schools as the students may find it challenging to visit a vaccination site.
schools will also look into alternative vaccination arrangements for those who need extra support when schools reopen after the june holidays, including providing transport to the vaccination centres, moe said.
the vaccination exercise for students is estimated to be completed by august, if all students who are eligible make an appointment to take their jabs.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
hong kong: hong kong police have arrested an elderly democracy activist as she made a solo demonstration over china's deadly tiananmen crackdown in a vivid illustration of the zero protest tolerance now wielded by authorities in the financial hub.
alexandra wong, 65, was detained on sunday (may 30) on suspicion of taking part in an unlawful assembly as she walked towards beijing's liaison office in hong kong.
wong known locally as "grandma wong" was a regular fixture of the huge democracy protests that swept hong kong in 2019. she could often be seen waving a union jack flag, a symbol of her dissatisfaction with beijing's rule since the city was handed to china by former colonial power britain in 1997. protest is now all but outlawed in hong kong.
authorities have used both the threat of the coronavirus and security concerns to ban demonstrations.
a vigil planned for this friday the 32nd anniversary of beijing's 1989 crackdown on democracy protests in tiananmen square has beendenied permission for the second year in a row.
authorities have cited the coronavirus, although hong kong is currently celebrating no local transmission cases of unknown origin for the last month.
activists had also sought permission for a small tiananmen-themed march on sunday to the liaison office, which represents the central government in the city, but it was also denied permission.
wong turned up anyway that afternoon holding as sign that read "32, june 4, tiananmen's lament" and a yellow umbrella the latter a symbol of hong kong's democracy movement.
the south china morning post said the pensioner started chanting slogans in a park before heading towards the liaison office by herself, while being followed and filmed by police.
she was stopped twice.
"i'm only by myself, just an old lady here.
why stop me?"
the post quoted wong as telling officers.
soon afterwards she was arrested.
police confirmed a 65-year-old woman surnamed wong had been arrested for "knowingly participating in an unauthorised assembly and attempting to incite others to join an unauthorised assembly".
hong kong's democracy movement has been crushed by a broad crackdown on dissent over the last year, including the imposition of a sweeping security law that criminalises much dissent.
in the middle of the 2019 protests wong disappeared for more than a year.
she resurfaced saying she had been detained by mainland authorities during a trip to shenzhen, a neighbouring city where she lived at the time.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
not registered?
register hereolice are continuing to question seven men after a teenager was stabbed to death near tennis courts in london's fifth homicide in three days.
the 18-year-old had been attacked as a group of men brawled in montrose park, edgware at 5.
54pm on monday.
he was found suffering from a stab injury in the tennis court area as families sat enjoying the bank holiday weather.
despite the best efforts of paramedics, and the air ambulance crew, the teenager was pronounced dead at the scene.
seven men–arrested on suspicion of offences including affray and attempted murder–remain in police custody.
the victim is the 15th teenager killed so far this year, equalling the number in 2020 and putting london on course to overtake the figure of 26 from 2019. fourteen teenagers have been fatally stabbed in 2021 and one aged 14 died with two members of his family in a house fire started deliberately in russett way, lewisham on march 6. meanwhile, police are still hunting the killer of flower seller tony eastlake, 55, who was stabbed near his stall outside essex road station in islington, north london.
mr eastlake was attacked just before 5.
30pm on saturday as he walked to a friend's house for dinner.
police are appealing for anyone who might have witnessed an altercation or someone running from the scene.
no arrests have been made.
scotland yard has now launched 50 murder investigations in 2021, of which 24 victims were under 25. the bloodshed came as a senior police officer said the bank holiday weekend was one of the busiest for emergency services this year.
superintendent dan ivey, who works in lambeth and southwark, tweeted on saturday: "last night was like new year's eve levels of demand.
relentless.
"high-risk suicidal people, fatal road collision, alcohol-fuelled football, pub and domestic assaults, illegal raves, injured officers.
plus the anti-lockdown protest.
"heroic effort from everyone in met police.
"he spoke as a police officer recovers in hospital after being punched in the face at charing cross police station.
the met said a man was arrested at the scene on suspicion of assault and the building temporarily closed to the public.
the officer was treated for a facial injury assessed as not life-threatening.
bonghwa, south korea: hidden in a south korean mountain tunnel designed to withstand a nuclear blast, the seeds of nearly 5,000 wild plant species are stored for safekeeping against climate change, natural disaster and war.
plant extinction is progressing at an alarming rate, researchers warn, driven by increasing human population, pollution and deforestation, even before many species are catalogued.
the baekdudaegan national arboretum seed vault centre preserves nearly 100,000 seeds from 4,751 different wild plant species to ensure they are not lost to "apocalyptic events", says its head lee sang-yong.
it is one of only two such facilities in the world, he told afp: unlike more commonplace seed banks, where samples are stored and regularly withdrawn for various purposes, deposits in seed vaults are meant to be permanent, with use intended only as a last resort to prevent extinction.
the vault is designated as a security installation by south korea's national intelligence service, surrounded by wire fences and dozens of cameras, with restrictions on filming in place and police patrolling on a regular basis.
inside, a lift leads about eight floors down to a cavernous concrete tunnel, where two heavy steel doors guard the storage room and its hand-cranked shelving racks, kept at minus 20 degrees celsius to preserve the seeds and 40 per cent humidity to keep them viable.
the vault's samples are largely of flora from the korean peninsula, but with a capacity of 2 million seeds, the south makes its space available to other countries, with kazakhstan and tajikistan among those to have taken up the offer.
depositors retain ownership of their samples and control over withdrawals.
but lee pointed out: "the seed vault stores seeds to prevent their extinction, so the best scenario would be that the seeds never have to be taken out.
"despite its doomsday-defying role, it was built by a country that in 1950 was invaded by the neighbouring north, and pyongyang has since developed a nuclear and missile arsenal.
the facility was built in the "safest spot" in south korea, lee said, designed to withstand a 6.
9-magnitude earthquake and even an atomic strike.
"it's geographically very safe," lee said.
"and we paved a 46m-deep underground tunnel to ensure it's safe from war and nuclear threats.
""race against time"the world's biggest and best-known seed vault is buried deep inside a former coal mine on svalbard, a remote arctic norwegian archipelago about 1,300km from the north pole.
dubbed the "noah's ark" of food crops, the global seed vault focuses on agricultural and related plants, storing more than one million seed samples from nearly every country on the planet.
but researchers say preserving the seeds of wild plants the original source of the crops we eat today should not be overlooked.
many crop relatives in the wild that could provide genetic diversity to help long-term food security "lack effective protection", according to a recent un report.
it warned that farming was likely to be less resilient against climate change, pests and pathogens as a result, adding: "the biosphere, upon which humanity as a whole depends .
.
.
is declining faster than at any time in human history.
"wild plants hold promise as future medicines, fuels and food, said the royal botanic gardens kew in a report last year, but around two-fifths of them are threatened with extinction, largely due to habitat destruction and climate change.
it was a "race against time" to identify them before they disappeared, it added.
research on wild plant seeds is "lacking tremendously", said na chae-sun, a senior researcher at the baekdudaegan national arboretum.
she and her team collect samples and carry out a meticulous and extensive process including x-ray tests and trial plantations before seeds are catalogued and stored in the seed vault.
"one might ask why is that wild flower on the kerbside important?"
she said.
"our job is to identify these one by one and letting people know how important they are," she went on.
"the crops that we eat today may have come from that nameless flower on the kerbside.
"it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore: the national environment agency (nea) is expecting an increasing number of dengue cases as singapore enters the warmer months of the year.
this is due to the accelerated breeding and maturation of the aedes aegypti mosquito and shorter incubation period of the dengue virus, the agency said on tuesday (jun 1).
the increasing population of the aedes mosquito across the island is also significant, it said.
more than 2,700 dengue cases have been reported in singapore since the start of the year.
there are currently 22 active dengue clusters.
while recent weekly dengue cases have been lower than in the same period last year, when singapore experienced a"historic" outbreak, the figures are still higher than those reported in 2017 and 2018, said nea.
the population of the aedes mosquito grew by about 30 per cent in april compared to january, said the agency.
the population remains high in areas including:- clementi west street 1;- hougang avenues 10, 6 and 8;- jurong east avenue 1 and jurong east street 32; and- mei chin road, mei ling street and stirling road.
"if left unchecked, the current high aedes aegypti mosquito population, coupled with the circulation of previously uncommon dengue virus serotypes and a sizeable proportion of people staying in and working from home, would add to the dengue risk this year," said nea.
lower immunity and "biting opportunities"nea highlighted that dengue cases caused by the less common virus serotypes denv-3 and denv-4 made up more than half the serotypes sampled since february.
"denv-3 has not been dominant since about three decades ago, and the incidence of denv-4 has been consistently low.
"thus the population immunity for denv-3 and denv-4 is low, and more people are susceptible to transmission of the virus," said the agency.
denv-3 has been detected in the dengue cluster at cashew terrace/hazel park terrace, while denv-4 has been detected in clusters at hougang central and pasir ris street 21, it said.
the agency also noted that more people are staying in and working at home during phase 2 (heightened alert) of singapore's covid-19 prevention efforts, due to last until jun 13. this could translate into more "biting opportunities" for the day-biting aedes mosquito, potentially increasing the risk of dengue transmission, it said.
the agency cited a study that found almost 50 per cent more dengue infections were reported during singapore's "circuit breaker" last year than there should have been, based on mathematical modelling.
"most of the excess infections were among adults of working age (20 to 64 years old) – people who would normally have been in workplaces, some of which would have been air-conditioned, instead of their homes," said nea.
the agency carried out the epidemiological study with the national university of singapore saw swee hock school of public health in august last year.
nea urged members of the public to remain vigilant and take steps to prevent mosquito breeding.
the agency said it continues to conduct targeted inspections at areas with higher mosquito populations and has stepped up operations at dengue clusters.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
geneva: coronavirus variants with clunky, alphanumeric names have now been assigned the letters of the greek alphabet in a bid to simplify discussion and pronunciation while avoiding stigma.
the world health organization revealed the new names on monday amid criticism that those given by scientists such as the so-called south african variant which goes by multiple names including b1351, 501y.
v2 and 20h/501y.
v2 were too complicated.
as such, the four coronavirus variants considered of concern by the un agency and known generally by the public as the uk, south africa, brazil and india variants have now been given the letters alpha, beta, gamma, delta according to the order of their detection.
other variants of interest continue down the alphabet.
"while they have their advantages, these scientific names can be difficult to say and recall, and are prone to misreporting," said the who, explaining the decision.
the choice of the greek alphabet came after months of deliberations in which other possibilities such as greek gods and invented, pseudo-classical names were considered by experts, according to bacteriologist mark pallen who was involved in the talks.
but many were already brands, companies or alien names.
another idea to refer to variants of concern as voc1, voc2 etc.
was scrapped after he pointed out it resembled an english swear word.
historically, viruses have often been associated with the locations from which they are thought to have emerged such as ebola which is named after the eponymous congolese river.
but this can be damaging for the places and often inaccurate such as with the so-called 'spanish flu' pandemic of 1918 whose origins are unknown.
"no country should be stigmatised for detecting and reporting variants," said who epidemiologist maria van kerkhove.
before the new who scheme, some scientists had adopted their own simplified nomenclature for variants such as a february paper using bird names.
however, it was criticised on the grounds that this could imperil birds and by the mother of a girl named 'robin'.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
by jeffrey hellerjerusalem (reuters) long the familiar face of israel, benjamin netanyahu has held on as prime minister for more than a decade, clinging to power through a criminal indictment and four elections in the past two years alone.
now, the question is whether the 71-year-old netanyahu, dubbed "the magician" by his admirers, has any cards left up his sleeve.
after years in which he exerted near-complete hegemony over israeli politics, an emerging broad coalition of opponents could be about to unseat him.
"fraud of the century," an indignant netanyahu declared on sunday, after fellow right-winger naftali bennett turned against him and opted to align with centrist opposition chief yair lapid despite a public promise that he wouldn't.
and while netanyahu's likud party has remained unflinchingly loyal to him, gideon saar, a disillusioned likud defector, is in line to join the new government-in-making as head of his own new horizon party.
israeli political commentators said the political knives have been out for a while for netanyahu, the country's longest-serving leader.
a sense that he was living on borrowed time after 12 consecutive years in office was compounded by a corruption trial now under way.
the cases involve alleged favours to media tycoons and illegal receipt of expensive cigars and champagne.
netanyahu has denied all wrongdoing and says, without offering any evidence, that he is a victim of a deep state conspiracy against him.
don't count him out yet, political commentators warn.
"it's still too early to declare that (the) "bibi era" of israeli politics has ended.
but if change is ultimately achieved, netanyahu will have been toppled by his colleagues on the right, who had it with his leadership," aluf benn, editor of the left-wing haaretz newspaper, wrote on monday.
gracious in defeat?popularly known by his childhood nickname, bibi, netanyahu is the son of a historian and attended high school and college in the united states, where his father taught.
never lost for a soundbite, his booming baritone hasresounded on the world stage since serving as israel's ambassador to the united nations from 1984 to 1988.  entering politics in israel as a likud legislator, he became party leader in 1993. netanyahu last lost the premiership, in his first term, before the turn of the millennium.
his gracious handover after a 1999 election to then-labour party leader ehud barak would seem almost impossible today, in the context of netanyahu's frequent social media sniping against his rivals.
at a changing of the guard in the prime minister's office, netanyahu and his wife sara smiled as they shook hands with barak and his spouse and chatted amiably with the couple with a glass of wine in their hands.
this time around, if lapid meets a wednesday deadline to form a new government with bennett slated to go first as prime minister in a "rotation" deal netanyahu will likely be ready to pounce as leader of the opposition.
in a possible taste of things to come, a stern-looking netanyahu went on television on monday to decry the creation of a "dangerous, left-wing government".
the tone of his remarks like "fraud of the century" has unavoidable echoes of his closest international ally, himself now unseated, former u. s.  president donald trump.
the diverse composition of an alliance of left-wing, centrist and right-wing parties would make it particularly unstable in a country so riven by political divisions that "do-over" elections have become the norm.
but for netanyahu's loyalist voters, popularly dubbed "bibists", he remains a leader tough on security and a bulwark against pressure, even from trump's successor president joe biden, for any bold steps that could lead to a palestinian state.
pro-netanyahu sentiment was still alive in southern israel this month, even as the area again came under intensive rocket attack from hamas in gaza.
"thank goodness we have a strong prime minister, bibi netanyahu," one resident said, without a hint of sarcasm, on israeli tv as he stood outside his parent's home after it was hit for a second time by a rocket during 11 days of fighting.
(editing by william maclean)malaysia's air force scrambled jets to intercept 16 chinese military aircraft off the country's coast in the south china sea, a rare incident officials said tuesday threatened "national sovereignty".
the us military will hand over its main bagram air base to afghan forces in about 20 days, an official said tuesday, as washington presses on with withdrawing the last of its troops from the country.
《!》ut,!china on tuesday denied an australian academic's claims that he had been tortured in custody during his two-year detention on espionage charges.
if you've got a citibank credit card, you're in luck.
here are the deals you can enjoy as a citibank credit cardmember (on top of the credit card's own perks).
a well-known global bank, citibank offers some of the best credit cards in singapore.
it [.
.
. ]
the post citibank credit card promotions and deals: june 2021 appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
the employers of an american journalist detained by myanmar authorities said monday they were yet to receive any information on his whereabouts or wellbeing, a week after he was detained.
n1   09:00-13:00   91 | n2    10:00-14:00  716the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
one: full blast might've been a quick replacement for one: empower, but the martial arts spectacle delivered plenty of exciting action.
the show, which aired on friday, 28 may, featured a one super series muay thai main event between a pair of top contenders and a flyweight co-main event between rising stars.
in the evening's final .
.
.
continue reading "saemapetch kos kulabdam, xie tkos agasa at one: full blast"fifteen tutoring firms have been hammered with millions of dollars of fines over alleged fraud, chinese state media said tuesday, as the government's chastening of the tech sector seeps into the private education businesses.
yahoo,,,『,』,!israeli opposition leader yair lapid on monday said many obstacles remain before a diverse coalition can be built to oust veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu, but voiced hope it will achieve the "greater goal".
singapore residents will soon be able to purchase "do-it-yourself" covid-19 tests over the counter at pharmacies, said prime minister lee hsien loong on monday (31 may).
a senior australian cabinet minister on monday dropped a high-profile defamation suit against public broadcaster abc over its publication of rape allegations that helped spark nationwide protests.
「」kol//,/.
he risked everything to give his baby girl a second chance at life this article, cannabis can mean death in malaysia.
for one dad, it also meant life for his daughter.
, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
china has jailed a popular blogger for "defaming martyrs" after he suggested the death toll of the china-india border clash last year was higher than the official count of four.
turkish spies snatched a nephew of a longtime foe of president recep tayyip erdogan in kenya and brought him back to turkey, media and family said on monday.
citi | wharton global wealth institute,from the dark days of italy's 2018 world cup qualifying fiasco to the eve of the european championships, roberto mancini has transformed the fortunes of fallen footballing giants italy.
thousands of doctors across india wore black armbands on tuesday calling for the arrest of a hugely popular guru who has claimed yoga can prevent covid-19 and that conventional medicine has killed thousands of coronavirus patients.
the vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap) aims to provide singaporeans with an added layer of peace of mind when they choose to be vaccinated.
the post vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap): how much will moh be insuring for serious side effects related to covid-19 vaccination?
appeared first on dollarsandsense.
sg.
polyu speed .
4,3. , .
,630. china has relaxed its family planning policy to allow couples to have three children after a census showed its population is rapidly ageing, state media reported monday, further unwinding four decades of controls in the world's most populous nation which have strangled the birthrate.
how do you deal with noisy neighbours in singapore?
soundproof your home for peace of mind and better work productivity.
here's how you can.
.
.
a major us-australia joint military exercise will go ahead this year despite pandemic concerns but will be significantly scaled-back, a senior australian military officer said tuesday.
india has been witnessing an unprecedented surge in covid-19 cases, largely due to the new variants.
the variant found initially in the united kingdom (b.
1.
1.
7) was found in parts of north india earlier this year and began to spread across the country.
the world health organisation (who) recently declared the variant first found in india (b.
1.
617) as a variant of global concern as it has already spread to more than 40 countries.
this underscores the fact that no one is safe until everyone is safe.
it calls for globally coordinated efforts to build herd immunity through mass vaccination and to develop new vaccines or tweak the existing ones to become effective against the new variants.
experts have been doubtful about the effectiveness of some of the covid-19 vaccines against the new variants of the virus.
an immediate outcome of the second wave in india is that many people are no longer hesitant to take the vaccine.
however, vaccine shortages have been reported in many parts of the country.
several people have criticised the government's vaccine maitri policy.
the government has already imposed temporary restrictions on the export of covid-19 vaccines from india.
although there is a need for these temporary restrictions to meet domestic demand, any definite move towards vaccine nationalism will be detrimental to global efforts to contain the virus.
the pandemic needs to be checked globally in a coordinated manner.
if this is not done, the virus will keep mutating and no country will remain isolated.
only way to decrease variants of covid-19 is by increasing vaccination, says dr.  gagandeep kang
from may 1, all those aged 18 and above became eligible in india to receive the covid-19 vaccines.
this means that 595 million people who require 1,190 million doses were added to the 344 million people in the 45 and above age group requiring 688 million doses.
inoculating this huge population calls for massive production capacities.
only a little over 12% of the population has received one dose and 3.
2% has received both the doses in india so far.
the current production capacity of covishield and covaxin is just over 70 million doses per month.
the government has allocated ₹45 billion as an advance commitment to serum institute of india and bharat biotech for enhancing their production capacity.
by june-july, in the best-case scenario, the combined production capacity of the two companies is expected to rise to 158 million doses per month.
the 50 million imported sputnik doses will add to this.
this vaccine will be available only in major private hospitals for now.
it is reported that the sputnik vaccine will be produced in india from july with an annual capacity of 156 million doses, which, according to the russian ambassador to india, will be gradually increased to 850 million doses.
even if all the three vaccines are exclusively used for domestic supply, the anticipated production in the near future will not be sufficient to meet the enormous vaccine demand.
being the pharmacy of the world, india needs to rise to the occasion and cater to the demand for vaccines in the country as well as facilitate inoculation of the global population, especially in poorer countries.
in the first week of may, the indian council of medical research said it was willing to share the know-how to produce covaxin with any company interested in production.
allowing multiple producers will lead to more competition and a reduction in prices.
the government can easily task the public sector vaccine manufacturers with the production of covaxin by providing support to them.
in its attempt to enhance the production of covaxin from 12.
5 million doses to 58 million doses a month, the government of india has involved three public sector enterprises — haffkine biopharmaceutical corporation, bharat immunologicals and biologicals corporation limited, and indian immunologicals limited.
nobel laureate's claim on variants | experts seek to dispel vaccine fears
while raising an alarm on the spread of infectious diseases, a 2020 report of the who on the urgent health challenges for the next decade expressed concern on the lack of access to medical products, including medicines and vaccines.
as infectious diseases are expected to increase in the coming years, india needs to frame a long-term strategy to enhance supply at the domestic and international level.
public sector enterprises should be an integral part of that strategy.
unfortunately, the public sector enterprise policy, released in february, has not identified public sector enterprises in the pharmaceuticals sector as strategically important, and therefore, all central public sector enterprises will subsequently be privatised.
what we need now is the mass production of covid-19 vaccines for the mass vaccination of the global population in order for us to develop herd immunity against the virus.
india still has options left for scaling up production.
the national health profile 2019, published by the central bureau of health intelligence, ministry of health and family welfare, shows that india has an installed capacity of 8,151.
7 million doses of vaccines annually, in the private and public sectors.
a few of these facilities can be re-purposed for the production of covid-19 vaccines.
scaling up production of existing vaccines and producing new vaccines is not easy.
unavailability of raw materials, complexities in the transfer of technology, and intellectual property barriers all hinder production.
serum institute and bharat biotech have faced constraints in continuing production due to the lack of raw materials.
vaccination is our only weapon
intellectual property rights act as a major barrier in scaling up production.
about 1,800 patents cover the single-use plastic reactors which are used in the production of some of the covid-19 vaccines.
similarly, other equipment and materials used in the production of vaccines are patent-protected and therefore supplied by only a few players.
india and south africa had led an initiative at the world trade organization (wto) for the waiver of intellectual property rights over products required for treating covid-19.
recently, after coming under pressure, the u. s.  extended support to this proposal covering only vaccines.
however, germany said it is opposed to it.
therefore, it is unclear how this ip waiver proposal will help enhance the global production of vaccines.
besides, the u. s.  support, which is limited to vaccines, may also limit the benefits deriving from the intellectual property waiver, if the proposal comes through the wto.
an article published in nature points out the benefits of mrna vaccine technology compared to conventional vaccine technologies.
the key advantage of this technology is easy scalability in production.
at present, the who has approved two mrna covid-19 vaccines produced by pfizer-biontech and moderna, and those vaccines have proven to be more effective than other vaccines.
global cooperation is needed to create an environment where those companies interested in producing the mrna vaccines get open license from the innovators.
coronavirus | opeds and editorials
global cooperation is also required for the sequencing of the viral genome to track and control the multiple variants.
only if we tame the virus together and quickly will the world benefit both in terms of health and economy.
reji joseph is an associate professor at institute for studies in industrial development, new delhi; thankom arun is a professor of global development and accountability at the university of essex, u. k.  views are personal 




 our code of editorial valuesplease enter a valid email address.
printable version | jun 1, 2021 8:46:19 pm | https://www.
thehindu.
com/opinion/op-ed/only-a-global-effort-can-tame-covid-19/article34683660.
ece

© thg publishing pvt ltd. 

to reassure indian muslims, the pm needs to state that the govt.
will not conduct an exercise like nrc
the school of the arts (sota) said that it will look into allegations of sexual misconduct against at least one of its staff on monday (may 31) in a facebook post.
the move was sparked by an instagram account created last week identified as durian.
dot that has since been deactivated, the post added.
when it was live, the account had posted the names and instagram handles of over 20 alleged male perpetrators and their supposed criminal activities that included sexual assault and sex with underaged victims according to the straits times.
the most viewed instagram posts were those involving sota teachers and students.
in one post, a ceramics teacher was accused of sexually harassing a 19-year-old verbally and physically when sharing a taxi.
another accused a student of taking upskirt photos and sharing them on a chat group meant for the entire cohort.
also read: 'i know your dirty little secret': nus graduate steals sex toy from woman's hostel room, sends her lewd textsthese posts were based on people's open submissions, but instagram account durian.
dot later impressed that submissions were from first-hand accounts and not rumours.
in sota's facebook announcement, it said: "we thank members of the public for drawing our attention to the various allegations concerning, amongst others, mr jason lim, a visual arts teacher of sota, on social media.
we are also aware of the allegations made by the durian.
dot instagram account which appears to now be deactivated.
""sota does not condone harassment or abuse of any sort, whether online or offline, by or against any member of staff or student," the school said.
they explained that reports made to the school would be looked into and punitive action taken once criteria is met and those who wish to lodge a report can submit it to whistleblow@sota.
edu.
sg.
"all reports will be treated with utmost seriousness, respect and confidentiality," they said.
police told media that they are looking into the matter and that someone has lodged a police report against the account.
they did not comment further on the report's details.
publication of identifying information about an individual on the internet with malicious intent, known as doxxing is considered an offence.
currently, media has not been able to verify who is running the account durian.
dot as the creator or creators insisted on being anonymous.
but, in one instagram post, they said they had "weighed the pros and cons, coming to the conclusion that it is more important to highlight these behaviours than to continue to keep mum".
last week, when the instagram account was live, some posts were removed either because the contributor was suspected of trolling or the the person involved had "taken necessary action to avoid repeating same behaviours".
also read: ngee ann poly suspends student union activities as allegations of toxic behaviour mount on social mediain one post, the account durian.
dot said they were "aware that this is considered doxxing and we can get reported.
.
.
for most cases, we have sufficient evidence on our end to work alongside the police, but we are not posting them in order to protect the victims' identities".
"for other cases, they may not be compelling due to the lack of evidence, so raising awareness is the next best bet.
our society normalises abuse much more than speaking up.
"alexanderkt@asiaone.
com
a murder investigation is underway and police plan increased patrols after 'tensions and emotions were said to be running high' in the arealatest news email updates straight to your inboxpolice are to step up patrols in the area where a 14-year-old boy was stabbed to death 'after playing football with his friends. '
the victim who has not been officially named- was walking along college road, n ear to the junction of wardour grove, around 7.
30pm on bank holiday monday, when he was fatally knifed.
he collapsed in the street and, despite the best efforts of paramedics, nothing could be done to save him.
detectives have launched a murder investigation and were searching for seven males who were seen heading towards college road.
police plan to flood the area with officers to reassure the public after 'tensions and emotions' were said to be running high.
det chief insp stu mobberley, who is leading the investigation, said: "we've made rapid progress in the investigation already and are following up a number of really strong lines of enquiry.
"we know tensions and emotions are high, and we're aware there is some speculation in the community that this was a racially-motivated attack.
"at the moment, there is nothing to suggest that this is a racially motivated attack.
the scene where a boy, 14, was fatally stabbed after being attacked by 'up to seven people' in college road, kingstanding.
"what we do know is this was appalling violence which has cost a young lad his life.
"we still have witnesses to speak to, and i'd urge anyone with information to get in touch with us as quickly as possible so that we can arrest those involved in this appalling attack.
"a post-mortem examination was due to be held this afternoon.
birminghamlive has learned the young victim was playing football with friends before he was murdered.
college road remains closed this morning with a blue tent set up in the middle of the street.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore pregnant women and cancer patients on active treatment are among the sub-groups of individuals that can also be vaccinated, said the multi-ministry task force (mtf) in an update on monday (may 31).
the task force noted that more people have been vaccinated both globally and locally, providing more evidence on the efficacy and safety of vaccine use.
this is especially in relation to specific sub-groups where clinical trial data had not been as substantive.
health minister ong ye kung said: "we can now be more inclusive in administering vaccinations.
since the start of the vaccination exercise, a few sub-groups have not been included, mostly because of medical reasons.
"but the expert committee on covid-19 vaccination has reviewed global and local data relating to these sub-groups and is satisfied that vaccination is safe and efficacious for many of them, he added.
pregnant women will be able to register and book a vaccination appointment from friday if they are part of the population group eligible for vaccination.
but mtf added that they should discuss the risks and benefits with their doctors to make an informed decision on the vaccination.
singapore's director of medical services, associate professor kenneth mak, said this applies irrespective of a woman's stage of pregnancy.
if a woman becomes pregnant after getting her first dose, she can proceed with the second as well.
"there is currently no evidence to suggest that the pfizer-biontech or moderna covid-19 vaccines may cause harm to pregnant women or their babies," mtf said.
"however, the committee recognises that the amount of data collected on this population segment is still much smaller compared to data on the general population.
"it added that it is also safe for women who are breastfeeding to be vaccinated and they do not have to suspend breastfeeding to receive the vaccine.
meanwhile, cancer patients on active treatment can also be vaccinated, mtf said.
but they should do so in a hospital setting, after assessment by their treating specialists on their suitability.
active treatment includes chemotherapy, immunotherapy or radiation therapy that individuals have undergone in the past three months or plan to undergo in the next two months.
under the current guidelines, cancer patients on hormonal therapy can continue to be vaccinated at any available vaccination site.
mtf said: "cancer patients on active cancer treatment remain a vulnerable population that is at an increased risk of complications from covid-19.
"there is currently no evidence of any safety signals or increased rates of adverse events from mrna-based covid-19 vaccines for this group.
"the expert committee is also finalising guidelines on vaccination for cancer patients on treatment, including those who consult private specialists.
additionally, those with severe cutaneous adverse reactions, which are rare drug-induced disorders, can also receive the vaccine.
such reactions include the stevens-johnson syndrome a rare, serious disorder of the skin and mucous membranes; toxic epidermal necrolysis a reaction where the skin blisters and peels, and can be life threatening; and severe hypersensitivity and rash.
these people may go to the vaccination centres, if they are part of the population group that is eligible.
mtf said the committee is also reviewing the safety data on people with a history of anaphylaxis, which is a severe allergic reaction that can kill unless treated promptly, to allow more to be safely vaccinated.
the review aims to be completed in the next two weeks and will set out guidelines.
mr ong said: "specifically, the committee is reviewing the restriction for those who are not allergic to the mrna vaccine or its components, but to other substances like seafood, painkillers, antibiotics.
"he added that the review will take about two weeks with the intention of removing these restrictions and allowing more individuals in this group to be eligible for vaccination.
"this is quite a sizeable group of over 30,000 individuals.
so the lifting of these restrictions will be a fairly meaningful one.
"read next: 6 key announcements from pm lee hsien loong's address on covid-19 plansjoin st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
the un health agency's director-general tedros adhanom ghebreyesus says the 'time has come' for a global pandemic treaty.
the head of the world health organization has called for speedily launching global negotiations to agree on an international treaty on pandemic preparedness, as part of sweeping reforms envisioned by member states.
tedros adhanom ghebreyesus, who director-general, told its annual ministerial assembly on monday that the united nations health agency faced a "serious challenge" to maintain its covid-19 response at the current level and required sustainable and flexible funding.
earlier in the day, health ministers agreed to study recommendations for ambitious reforms made by independent experts to strengthen the capacity of both the who and countries to contain new viruses.
the ministers from the who's 194 member states will meet from november 29 to decide whether to launch negotiations on the pandemic treaty.
"the one recommendation i believe will do the most to strengthen who and global health security is the recommendation of a treaty on pandemic preparedness and response which could also strengthen relations between member states and foster cooperation.
this is an idea whose time has come," tedros said.
in his closing remarks at the who's virtual annual health assembly, tedros said the "lack of sharing of data, information, pathogens, technologies and resources" was a defining characteristic of the pandemic.
"a [pandemic] treaty would foster improved sharing, trust and accountability, and provide the solid foundation on which to build other mechanisms for global health security.
"only two international treaties have previously been negotiated under the auspices of the who in its 73-year history: the framework convention on tobacco control in 2003 and the international health regulations in 2005. the coronavirus has infected more than 170 million people and killed nearly 3.
6 million, according to a johns hopkins university tally.
on the final day of the week-long assembly, the who member states agreed in a 14-page resolution to "strengthen who's capacity to rapidly and appropriately assess disease outbreaks" of possible global concern.
"it's essential that we strengthen global (disease) surveillance and provide the world health organization with the authority and the capacity to do this important job for all the peoples of the world," australian prime minister scott morrison told the assembly.
the states called for a total overhaul of the global alarm system, and for a stronger, more independent who to help prevent future pandemics [file: francis mascarenhas/reuters]according to the findings of three independent panels that had reported to the assembly, countries and institutions had been woefully unprepared to deal with covid-19.
they called for a total overhaul of the global alarm system, and for a stronger, more independent who to help avert future pandemics.
one of the reports found that the un agency had been too slow in declaring a so-called public health emergency of international concern.
who sounded its highest level of alert on january 30, 2020. after days of discussion, members agreed to create a new working group to study and streamline the numerous recommendations in the reports, and create concrete proposals for next year's assembly to consider.
the text called for member states to "ensure the adequate, flexible, sustainable and predictable financing of who's programme budget".
only about 16 percent of the who budget comes from regular membership fees, with the remainder coming from voluntary and heavily earmarked contributions.
monday's resolution also called on all countries to strengthen their core public health capacities, increase their ability to detect new threats and communicate such threats effectively both at home and internationally.
who's emergencies director, mike ryan, welcomed the decisions, saying: "right now the pathogens have the upper hand, they are emerging more frequently and often silently in a planet that is out of balance.
"we need to turn that very thing that has exposed us in this pandemic, our interconnectedness, we need to turn that into a strength," he said.
chile's ambassador frank tressler zamorano said on behalf of 60 countries that a pandemic treaty would help "heed the call by so many experts to reset the system".
the resolution, meanwhile, stopped short of explicitly backing the experts' recommendation to hand the who broader powers to launch investigations or communicate about health threats without waiting for a green light from the countries concerned.
those who have lost a partner to covid are struggling to pay for childcare and other expenses as newly single parents.
children in the us are struggling with the emotional and financial toll of losing a parent to covid-19.
residents' welfare associations in urban areas provide critical medical aid as country's healthcare system buckles.
infection rates are falling but the virus continues to tear through rural india.
follow al jazeera english:
the seeds are stored for safekeeping against climate change, natural disaster and war
              get breaking news alerts from gulf news
            we'll send you latest news updates through the day.
you can manage them any time by clicking on the notification icon.
dear reader,this section is about living in uae and essential information you cannot live without.
register to read and get full access to gulfnews.
com
by clicking below to sign up, you're agreeing to our
terms of use
and
privacy policy
forgot passwordor
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
geneva (reuters) the world health organisation, at the heart of the world's slow and stuttering handling of the covid-19 pandemic, faces a potential shake-up aimed at preventing future outbreaks from destroying lives and livelihoods.
health ministers agreed on monday to study recommendations for ambitious reforms made by independent experts to strengthen the capacity of both the un agency and countries to contain new pathogens.
under the resolution submitted by the european union, and adopted by consensus, member states are to be firmly in the driver's seat of the reforms through a year-long process.
the new virus has infected more than 170 million people and killed nearly 3.
7 million, according to a reuters tally of official national figures.
health ministers from who's 194 member states will also meet from nov 29 to decide whether to launch negotiations on an international treaty aimed at boosting defences against any future pandemic.
who's emergencies director mike ryan welcomed the decisions, telling its annual ministerial assembly: "right now the pathogens have the upper hand, they are emerging more frequently and often silently in a planet that is out of balance.
"we need to turn that very thing that has exposed us in this pandemic, our interconnectedness, we need to turn that into a strength," he said.
the decisions, approved in committee, are due to be formally adopted in a plenary session later on monday, the last day of its week-long assembly.
one panel, headed by former new zealand prime minister helen clark and former liberian president ellen johnson sirleaf, said that a new global system should be set up to respond faster to disease outbreaks to help ensure no future virus causes a pandemic as devastating as covid-19.
the experts, who found crucial failures in the global response in early 2020, said that the who should be given the power to send investigators swiftly to chase down new disease outbreaks and to publish their full findings without delay.
they also called for setting up a global health threats council, to be led at the head of state and government level, to maintain political commitment to pandemic preparedness.
"the world was hit by this virus unprepared.
and if another virus emerged tomorrow this would be still be the case," mr bjorn kummel, of germany's federal health ministry, said last week.
"a green light for this treaty process is the greatest commitment to learn from this crisis that this assembly could have sent out.
it is the most effective way to make sure that the global health crisis becomes the final one.
"join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
west midlands police seeking up to seven suspects after teenager's death on mondaylast modified on tue 1 jun 2021 16.
25 bstpolice are searching for up to seven people after a 14-year-old boy was stabbed to death in birmingham.
the teenager, who has not been named, was attacked on a busy road in kingstanding, north birmingham, at about 7.
30pm on monday and died at the scene.
police believe up to seven suspects fled the area.
west midlands police began a murder investigation and said they had "flooded" the area with officers to track down the culprits of the "shocking and senseless" attack.
on tuesday, stu mobberley, the detective chief inspector leading the investigation, said: "we've made rapid progress in the investigation already and are following up a number of really strong lines of inquiry.
"he said "tensions and emotions in the community" were running high and there was speculation the attack was racially motivated, but as yet police had seen nothing to suggest this was the case.
"what we do know is that this was appalling violence which has cost a young lad his life," mobberley said.
"we still have witnesses to speak to, and i'd urge anyone with information to get in touch with us as quickly as possible so that we can arrest those involved in this appalling attack.
"police said they believed the teenager was chased on college road, kingstanding, by a number of people in the direction of a mcdonald's restaurant at about 7.
30pm.
he was believed then to have been stabbed by one of the youths.
he collapsed on the road and was pronounced dead a short time later.
west midlands ambulance service said it sent two ambulances to the scene, which arrived within five minutes of the 999 call.
the service said "nothing could be done" to save the teenager.
a spokesperson said: "crews arrived to find a teenage boy in a critical condition following a stabbing.
the team of ambulance staff worked together to administer advanced life support at the scene.
tragically, despite their best efforts, nothing could be done to save the boy and he was confirmed dead at the scene a short time later.
"the west midlands police and crime commissioner, simon foster, said the attack had "shocked and appalled the people of the west midlands".
he added: "first and foremost my thoughts go out to the victim and his family and friends.
a child has needlessly lost his life, but when somebody is killed it ruins and devastates many more,.
"whilst those close to the boy are facing untold grief, i would like to reassure them and the wider community that west midlands police are working around the clock to find those responsible for this, and officers won't rest until they do.
"this stabbing underlines the need for communities, the police and other organisations across the west midlands to work together to tackle violence. "
west midlands police said people could contact the investigation via live chat on the police website, or by calling 101 quoting log 3313 of 31/5.
call crimestoppers anonymously on 0800 555 111.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore there are ample supplies of food and essential items but people should buy only what they need, said trade and industry minister gan kim yong.
during a virtual press conference on monday (may 31), he said singapore is working with malaysia to ensure the continued flow of essential supplies between the two countries as malaysia imposes a two-week lockdown from june 1 to june 14. mr gan, who co-chairs the multi-ministry task force on covid-19, said the government has been working with relevant agencies and companies to build up singapore's existing stockpile and further diversify its sources of food and essential items, while also increasing local production.
the economic agencies are also working with firms especially those dealing with essential goods and services to minimise disruption to their supply lines, he added.
"as the pandemic continues to evolve globally, we must remain prepared and vigilant as a nation, while staying flexible and adaptable," mr gan said.
he noted that the overall impact of phase two (heightened alert) measures on singapore's gross domestic product is expected to be modest, with the effects to differ across various sectors.
domestic consumer-oriented sectors, such as food and beverage services, retail and land transport will be hit harder, while the impact on more outward-oriented sectors such as manufacturing and finance is likely to be less severe.
last saturday, mr gan had visited supermarket chain fairprice's distribution centre in joo koon and a cold warehouse at local logistics firm ych's supply chain city to better understand the measures that have been put in place to ensure sufficient food and essential supplies for all.
he said then that singapore and malaysia have been working together closely since the start of the pandemic to ensure the flow of goods and supplies are not disrupted.
these efforts would continue following malaysia's full movement control order (mco) roll-out from june 1, he added.
singapore imports an array of products from malaysia, which include food items such as chicken and vegetables.
malaysia's total nationwide lockdown means that only essential economic sectors will be allowed to operate.
the country has seen new highs in covid-19 infections and deaths in may, despite putting in place moderate restrictions under the mco.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore a van driver who changed lanes abruptly on the bukit timah expressway (bke) on sept 7, 2018, struck a motorcyclist and seriously injured him.
instead of stopping to help the victim, zainlai mashot drove off and refused to admit to the crime even after the rented van he was driving was tracked down by the police.
he admitted to his offences only when the authorities confronted him with video footage of the accident.
on tuesday (june 1), the 45-year-old singaporean pleaded guilty to offences that included causing grievous hurt by a negligent act, failing to stop after an accident, and removing the vehicle involved without police authority.
he was jailed for two weeks and a day, banned from driving for two years, and fined $2,000.
the court heard that zainlai was driving on the bke in the direction of the pan-island expressway at around 7.
40am on the day of the incident when he suddenly switched from the middle to the rightmost lane.
a video clip of the accident played in court shows the van colliding with the motorcycle and the victim being flung to the ground.
the footage shows zainlai driving away from the scene.
the victim, then 24, sustained an elbow fracture and multiple abrasions on his arms and legs.
he was hospitalised for four days and given 50 days' hospitalisation leave.
deputy public prosecutor r.  arvindren said that the motorcycle was damaged with scratches and zainlai did not make any compensation to the victim.
he added that zainlai was unremorseful as he denied being the driver of the van when the vehicle was tracked down.
in mitigation, zainlai asked for a lighter sentence as he had to care for his mother and three daughters who are still in school.
for causing grievous hurt to the motorcyclist by a negligent act, zainlai could have been jailed for up to two years or fined $5,000.
for failing to help the injured motorcyclist, he could have been jailed for up to a year or fined $3,000.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
taipei: foxconn and its billionaire founder terry gou sought permission from taiwan's government on tuesday (jun 1) to buy covid-19 vaccines from germany's biontech as the island grapples with a rise in infections.
the proposed purchase of 5 million doses, which would be distributed among the general population, comes after the government ceded to pressure from opposition parties to allow companies, religious groups and local governments to arrange imports.
the taiwanese government's own deal with biontech fell through earlier this year a problem taiwan has blamed on pressure from beijing.
china has denied the accusation.
biontech did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
gou, who has retired from the world's largest contract manufacturer, said on saturday they hope to airlift the shots from germany to taiwan without going via any middlemen.
taiwan health minister chen shih-chung expressed his gratitude to gou and said the government was reviewing the application.
after recording just a handful of daily infections for months, taiwan is now dealing with relatively large numbers of community transmissions.
it has vaccinated less than 2 per cent of its 23.
5 million people, but has almost 30 million shots on order from astrazeneca, moderna and two domestic firms.
while it welcomes help in obtaining vaccines from companies and religious groups, taiwan's government has stipulated that only it can distribute the shots.
companies must also provide letters of authorisation from the original manufacturer.
shanghai fosun pharmaceutical group has a contract with biontech to sell the vaccines in greater china, including to taiwan, but taiwan's government says it has and will only deal with biontech in germany and that it does not trust vaccines from china.
fosun did not respond to a request for comment on foxconn and gou's plans.
china, which sees taiwan as its own territory, says taiwan's government has gone against commercial principles in seeking to bypass fosun and go directly to biontech.
fosun did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
outside of greater china, biontech has partnered with pfizer.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
last month sinopharm became the first chinese vaccine to be approved by the who.
(file)the world health organization on tuesday approved the sinovac covid-19 vaccine for emergency use -- the second chinese jab to receive the who's green light.
the un health agency signed off on the two-dose vaccine, which is already being deployed in several countries around the world.
"who today validated the sinovac-coronavac covid-19 vaccine for emergency use," it said in a statement.
the move gives countries, funders, procuring agencies and communities "assurance that it meets international standards for safety, efficacy and manufacturing".
last month sinopharm became the first chinese vaccine to be approved by the who.
the organisation has also given emergency use listing to vaccines being made by pfizer/biontech, moderna, johnson & johnson, and the astrazeneca jab being produced in india, south korea and the eu, which it counts separately.
who's listing paves the way for countries worldwide to quickly approve and import a vaccine for distribution, especially those states without an international-standard regulator of their own.
it also opens the door for the jabs to enter the covax global vaccine-sharing scheme, which aims to provide equitable access to doses around the world, particularly in poorer countries.
currently only astrazeneca and some pfizer jabs are flowing through the scheme.
"the world desperately needs multiple covid-19 vaccines to address the huge access inequity across the globe," said mariangela simao, the who's assistant director general for access to health products.
"we urge manufacturers to participate in the covax facility, share their know-how and data and contribute to bringing the pandemic under control.
"the sinovac jab is already in use in 22 territories around the world, according to an afp count.
apart from china, the countries using sinovac include chile, brazil, indonesia, mexico, thailand and turkey.
the who's strategic advisory group of experts on immunisation have reviewed the jab and published their advice on its usage.
"who recommends the vaccine for use in adults 18 years and older, in a two-dose schedule with a spacing of two to four weeks," the agency said.
"vaccine efficacy results showed that the vaccine prevented symptomatic disease in 51 percent of those vaccinated and prevented severe covid-19 and hospitalisation in 100 percent of the studied population.
"(except for the headline, this story has not been edited by ndtv staff and is published from a syndicated feed.
)track latest news live on ndtv.
com and get news updates from india and around the world.
watch live news:follow us:.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
advertisement .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

                    tuesday, 01 jun 2021
                johor baru: two malaysians working in singapore are being harassed by illegal moneylenders after trying to borrow money to recover their losses in an investment scheme.
one of them, only wanting to be known as jackie, 28, said they tried to take a loan to recover the s$36,000 (rm112,465) lost in an investment scheme but ended up paying a total of s$5,100 (rm15,937) to the moneylender.
"we have been working in singapore for the past five years and have saved up a significant amount of money, enough to buy a house back home.
"we initially invested in a unit trust scheme through a friend in april in hopes of saving up even more money in the next one or two years so that we can return to malaysia and start a business but did not expect it to end in losses.
"to recover our losses, we found a facebook page advertising moneylending services in singapore and contacted them on may 16, thinking that it was a legitimate moneylender.
"i did not know at the time that moneylenders in singapore, even legal ones, are not allowed to advertise their services in public or social media, " he said in a virtual press conference on tuesday (june 1).
after submitting their identification documents to the moneylender, they were informed that the application was rejected, as they were not locals, and would have to pay s$2,500 (rm7,815) as an activation fee in order to get the loan, said jackie, who works in the food and beverage industry.
desperate, they did as told but the moneylender asked for another s$3,000 (rm9,377) to "process the application".
by then, the two of them felt suspicious and wanted to cancel the loan.
"the moneylender said we would need to pay a cancellation fee of s$3,000 and gave us an alternative where he would transfer s$300 (rm937) to us and we have to repay him s$200 (rm624) daily for three days.
"we took the second option but on the fourth day, he threatened to splash paint at my friend's house in taman johor jaya, johor baru if we did not continue paying, so we transferred another s$200 to him.
"after seeking advice from a policeman, we ignored the moneylender.
however, on may 27, my friend's house was splashed with red paint, which also damaged her front gate, porch and car.
"the moneylender threatened to do more harm and asked for s$1,800 (rm5,625), which he said was inclusive of a fee to pay the runners who splashed paint at my friend's house.
"we also did as told out of fear for our family members' safety, " he said, adding that police reports have been lodged in singapore and malaysia.
when contacted, seri alam ocpd supt mohd sohaimi ishak said a police report regarding the paint splashing incident was received on may 27 and investigations are ongoing under section 427 of the penal code.
meanwhile, mca national public complaints and services bureau deputy chief chua jian boon, who organised the press conference, reminded the public not to get loans from illegal moneylenders or through social media that promised fast-track loan approvals.
"with the total lockdown in place until june 14, i believe more people will face financial difficulties, which could lead to them asking for a loan from illegal sources or ah long.
"it is best not to do so as such moneylenders usually have hidden charges or conditions to trap their victims, " he said.
tags / keywords:
investment
                                                                ,
                                                                                                losses
                                                                ,
                                                                                                illegal moneylender
                                                                ,
                                                                                                singapore
                                                                ,
                                                                                                borrow money
                                                                ,
                                                                                                harassment



report it to us.
thank you for your report!copyright © 1995-
            

 star media group berhad (10894d)best viewed on chrome browsers.
{{item['v1 header']}}
   {{item['v1 body']}}

  {{item['v2 header']}}

are you having urinary troubles?
by taking the survey, it is deemed that you consent to the termswe hope you enjoy this feature!
stuck in a hotel room at the jw marriott hotel singapore south beach on his 13th day of his 21-day quarantine, glen "lunarmetal" suryasaputra still gave off a very positive vibe despite the recent situation over his ex-organisation.
the 27-year-old full-time esports pro and captain of the former ex-giants gaming squad had just returned from france after competing at the us$3 million prize pool six invitational 2021, and was serving out his quarantine period with his teammates in the same hotel.
it was then they found out that he and his team would be dropped from the giants gaming roster.
the news, which was then revealed publicly the next day on friday in a twitter post, meant that his team had to scramble to find an organisation to stay in the rainbow 6 apac south league.
that's because the rules state that a team participating in the tournament has to have a legal entity behind it, and without an organisation, lunarmetal and his squad could be in danger of being removed.
thankfully, ubisoft, along with their former org, have offered to help, but the bulk of their search still has to be done by the team themselves.
"i think the timing [of them being dropped] was unexpected, but the decision was quite reasonable," said lunarmetal.
it's a strange opinion, given that lunarmetal's team was impacted by the decision.
that said, to understand why, you need to know how the rainbow 6 apac league works.
the rainbow 6 apac league is divided into two sections: apac north and apac south.
lunarmetal's squad were the champions of the apac north, before they were transferred over to apac south.
the move, lunarmetal said, was unexpected, to both players and their former org, which had picked them up because they had plans for the apac north market.
apac south, which now mainly focuses on southeast asian and oceanic teams, was not part of the giant's business strategy.
"we were the champions of north last season, we beat a lot of the big organisations, such as c9 and fnatic.
north was seen as the premier league, with powerhouse teams from japan and korea.
that's where the sponsors and viewers were.
in esports, viewership is king," explained lunarmetal.
"when giants picked us up in early 2020, they already had in mind that we were going to be in apac north.
the plans that they made when they picked us up was with us being in apac north.
"when ubisoft moved giants over to apac south to create a more competitive environment, viewership numbers grew, and it seemed that the strategy was paying off.
however, lunarmetal and his team weren't happy with how things were turning out, especially with the postponement of the six invitational (the equivalent of lol's worlds and dota 2's ti) that had been scheduled for february.
the team eventually finished in the last spots, which was not what they were hoping for.
"we should have definitely not been so affected by si being postponed, but if you're in a position like us, where some of us have to do national service, and trying to squeeze out the time we have left to practice and do our best, having the event postponed or cancelled, and then having to be moved to apac south, which was a surprise to all of us — it really affected our motivation," said lunarmetal.
despite the setback, lunarmetal, his team, as well as their coach, have not given up on each other.
lunarmetal told yahoo esports that they plan to continue on together.
"we are reaching out to a lot of orgs, and we are liaising with ubisoft to find a new home.
because giants pulled out of their own accord, the licensing [to compete] still remains with us," said lunarmetal.
"i don't think we are at a risk of losing our slot at apac south.
it's just a matter for us to find an org to represent.
ubisoft has also explained to us about some contingency plans we can do if we can't find an org.
"aloysius low is an ex-cnet editor with more than 15 years of experience.
he's really into cats and is currently reviewing products at canbuyornot.
comfor more esports news updates, visit https://yhoo.
it/yahooesportsseaand check out yahoo esports southeast asia's facebook page.
check out esports videos from yahoo tv:malaysia's air force scrambled jets to intercept 16 chinese military aircraft off the country's coast in the south china sea, a rare incident officials said tuesday threatened "national sovereignty".
the us military will hand over its main bagram air base to afghan forces in about 20 days, an official said tuesday, as washington presses on with withdrawing the last of its troops from the country.
《!》ut,!china on tuesday denied an australian academic's claims that he had been tortured in custody during his two-year detention on espionage charges.
if you've got a citibank credit card, you're in luck.
here are the deals you can enjoy as a citibank credit cardmember (on top of the credit card's own perks).
a well-known global bank, citibank offers some of the best credit cards in singapore.
it [.
.
. ]
the post citibank credit card promotions and deals: june 2021 appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
the employers of an american journalist detained by myanmar authorities said monday they were yet to receive any information on his whereabouts or wellbeing, a week after he was detained.
n1   09:00-13:00   91 | n2    10:00-14:00  716the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
one: full blast might've been a quick replacement for one: empower, but the martial arts spectacle delivered plenty of exciting action.
the show, which aired on friday, 28 may, featured a one super series muay thai main event between a pair of top contenders and a flyweight co-main event between rising stars.
in the evening's final .
.
.
continue reading "saemapetch kos kulabdam, xie tkos agasa at one: full blast"fifteen tutoring firms have been hammered with millions of dollars of fines over alleged fraud, chinese state media said tuesday, as the government's chastening of the tech sector seeps into the private education businesses.
yahoo,,,『,』,!israeli opposition leader yair lapid on monday said many obstacles remain before a diverse coalition can be built to oust veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu, but voiced hope it will achieve the "greater goal".
singapore residents will soon be able to purchase "do-it-yourself" covid-19 tests over the counter at pharmacies, said prime minister lee hsien loong on monday (31 may).
a senior australian cabinet minister on monday dropped a high-profile defamation suit against public broadcaster abc over its publication of rape allegations that helped spark nationwide protests.
citi | wharton global wealth institute,he risked everything to give his baby girl a second chance at life this article, cannabis can mean death in malaysia.
for one dad, it also meant life for his daughter.
, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
china has jailed a popular blogger for "defaming martyrs" after he suggested the death toll of the china-india border clash last year was higher than the official count of four.
turkish spies snatched a nephew of a longtime foe of president recep tayyip erdogan in kenya and brought him back to turkey, media and family said on monday.
line friends!+9,!
5/31 6/6),,!from the dark days of italy's 2018 world cup qualifying fiasco to the eve of the european championships, roberto mancini has transformed the fortunes of fallen footballing giants italy.
thousands of doctors across india wore black armbands on tuesday calling for the arrest of a hugely popular guru who has claimed yoga can prevent covid-19 and that conventional medicine has killed thousands of coronavirus patients.
the vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap) aims to provide singaporeans with an added layer of peace of mind when they choose to be vaccinated.
the post vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap): how much will moh be insuring for serious side effects related to covid-19 vaccination?
appeared first on dollarsandsense.
sg.
spinningfields,,, 65-6,,!china has relaxed its family planning policy to allow couples to have three children after a census showed its population is rapidly ageing, state media reported monday, further unwinding four decades of controls in the world's most populous nation which have strangled the birthrate.
how do you deal with noisy neighbours in singapore?
soundproof your home for peace of mind and better work productivity.
here's how you can.
.
.
a major us-australia joint military exercise will go ahead this year despite pandemic concerns but will be significantly scaled-back, a senior australian military officer said tuesday.
singapore: singapore reported 15 new covid-19 community cases as of noon on tuesday (jun 1), including seven with no links to previous cases.
eight were linked to previous cases, with six already on quarantine and two detected through surveillance, said the ministry of health (moh).
there were also three imported cases, who had been placed on stay-home notice upon arrival in singapore.
no new infections were reported in migrant workers' dormitories.
in all, singapore reported 18 new covid-19 cases on tuesday.
closure of hua zai outletsmoh said it is investigating cases of covid-19 infection among individuals who work athua zai outletsas epidemiological investigations have found that there is "likely ongoing transmission".
the hua zai outlet in ntuc foodfare (308 anchorvale road) has been closed since may 30, following the detection of cases linked to the coffee shop.
to break any potential chain of transmission and enable deep cleaning of the premises, moh said all 26 hua zai outlets will be closed to the public for two weeks from jun 1.  they will reopen on jun 15.
7 unlinked casesa 37-year-old singaporean who is a resident at mindsville@napiri is among the seven unlinked cases.
the woman developed a runny nose and cough on may 29 and subsequently a fever on may 30.  she was taken to a polyclinic the next day, where she underwent both an antigen rapid test (art) and polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test.
both tests came back positive for covid-19 infection on may 31 and her serology test result is pending.
the other cases include a 46-year-old singaporean who works as a front desk staff member at hotel boss and a 29-year-old malaysian who works as a car park roving officer at top parking.
both had developed symptoms such as fever and body aches prior to testing positive for covid-19.
there is also a 26-year-old malaysian who works as a delivery rider for pizza hut (hougang green) and a 72-year-old singaporean who is employed by smn elite security as a security guard at shriro house (11 chang charn road).
the remaining two cases are a 56-year-old singaporean homemaker and an 82-year-old singaporean retiree.
all of the other unlinked cases experienced symptoms such as fever, body aches, shortness of breath or loss of taste prior to testing positive for covid-19.
hong ye group cleaners cluster growsa 17-year-old singaporean who works at ang mo kio-thye hua kwan hospital has been linked to the hong ye group cleaners cluster, which now has a total of 22 infections.
the teenager, known was case 63929, last went to work on may 28.  she is a close contact of a previously confirmed case, an 18-year-old singaporean who is a full-time national serviceman at the civil defence academy.
case 63929 developed a fever and sore throat on may 30 but did not seek medical treatment until may 31 when she visited a clinic and was tested for covid-19.
her test result came back positive for covid-19 infection on the same day and her serology test result is pending.
new clustersthree new clusters have been identified.
two new cases reported on tuesday have been linked to the case 63887 cluster, which now has three infections.
case 63887, a 65-year-old singaporean who is a homemaker, was confirmed to have covid-19 on may 30. among the two new cases is a four-year-old singaporean student at my first skool at block 332b anchorvale link.
the girl was last in school on may 12.  she developed a cough and a fever on may 26 and may 27 respectively, and sought medical treatment at a clinic on may 28. as she had been identified as a close contact of case 63887, she was quarantined on may 30 and was tested for covid-19 on the same day.
her test result came back positive for covid-19 on may 31 and her serology test result is pending.
the other case linked to the case 63887 is a 27-year-old malaysian homemaker.
she developed a fever and cough during quarantine and tested positive for covid-19 on may 31. the second new cluster is linked to case 63399, a 35-year-old malaysian who is a kitchen crew member at kota zheng zong bak kut teh (serangoon gardens).
the new case in this cluster is a 29-year-old malaysian who works as a waitress at chir chir restaurant at bugis junction.
this brings the total number of cases in this cluster to three.
the third new cluster is linked to case 63743, a 24-year-old malaysian who works at mcdonald's (the woodgrove).
the new case in this cluster is a 28-year-old malaysian who works as a waiter at acid bar.
this brings the total number of cases in this cluster to three.
2-year-old among community casesa two-year-old singaporean who is a student at carpe diem at 2 ang mo kio drive has been added to the cluster linked to a 31-year-old singaporean man who works as a property agent with era realty network.
the cluster has now grown to seven cases.
the girl is a family member of three previously confirmed covid-19 cases and was last in school on may 14.  she was quarantined on may 24 and tested negative for covid-19 on may 30. she was asymptomatic and was detected when she was tested again on may 31 during quarantine.
her serology test result is positive.
a 39-year-old singaporean homemaker has been linked to the tektronix cluster.
she is a family member and household contact of a previously confirmed case.
the woman was quarantined on may 25.  she was tested for covid-19 on may 26 and her result came back negative on the same day.
she then developed a fever on may 31 and was again tested for covid-19.
her result came back positive on the same day and her serology test result is pending.
the remaining linked case is a 30-year-old singaporean man who works as a technician at st engineering innosparks.
he is a family member and household contact of a previously confirmed case.
the man developed a fever and cough on may 30 and sought medical treatment at a polyclinic the next day, where he underwent both an art and pcr test.
he was immediately isolated when his art came back positive.
his pcr test result also came back positive for covid-19 on the same day while his serology test result is negative.
imported casestwo of the imported cases are singaporeans who returned from india and the philippines.
the remaining imported case is a short-term visit pass holder who arrived from the philippines for a work project in singapore.
moh said the short-term visit pass holder, a 38-year-old filipino man, had arrived on apr 23 and served his stay-home notice at a dedicated facility until may 7. his pre-departure test taken in the philippines on apr 22, his on-arrival test in singapore on apr 23, as well as his swab done on may 6 during stay-home notice, were negative for covid-19.
he is asymptomatic, and was detected when he was tested for covid-19 on may 29, with his test result coming back positive the next day.
"his ct value was very high, which is indicative of a low viral load, and his serology test result has also come back positive," said moh.
"given that these indicate likely past infection, we have classified the case as imported based on his travel history.
he is likely to be shedding minute fragments of the virus rna, which are no longer transmissible and infective to others.
"number of active cases in intensive care unit or requiring oxygen supplementation.
(image: ministry of health)22 more patients dischargedmoh said the overall number of new cases in the community has decreased from 176 cases in the week before to 125 cases in the past week.
the number of unlinked cases in the community has also decreased from 30 cases in the week before to 27 cases in the past week.
among the 179 cases reported from may 26 to jun 1, 49 cases have tested positive for their serology tests while 112 have tested negative.
another 18 serology test results are pending.
twenty-two more cases have been discharged from hospitals or community isolation facilities, bringing singapore's total recoveries to 61,481. there are 217 cases still in hospital.
most of them are stable or improving, and two are in critical condition in the intensive care unit.
another 338 are being isolated and cared for at community facilities.
as of tuesday, singapore has reported a total of 62,069 covid-19 cases and 33 fatalities.
​​​​​​​mandatory covid-19 tests began for residents of three housing blocks in yishun and hougang on tuesday.
residents ofblock 745 yishun street 72were being tested after moh said on monday that there was "likely covid-19 transmission" in the block.
residents ofblocks 501 and 507 hougang avenue 8were also set to undergo the mandatory covid-19 tests, after traces of the virus were found in wastewater samples taken from those blocks.
moh said no confirmed cases had yet to be identified in the blocks.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore singapore airlines (sia) had sought and obtained overwhelming shareholder support to raise funds through its mandatory convertible bonds (mcb) and rights share issues – funds that the airline said will put it on a strong footing to re-emerge as a global player as the covid-19 pandemic recedes and borders reopen.
the company was responding to a series of questions put to it last week by the securities investors association (singapore), or sias.
"sia sought and obtained strong shareholder support for the additional mcbs at the april 2020 extraordinary general meeting, with 99.
66 per cent of shareholders approving the resolution," the airline said in a response issued via the singapore exchange on tuesday (june 1) morning.
"this was subsequently renewed at the july 2020 annual general meeting (agm), where 99.
76 per cent of shareholders approved the resolution to issue the additional mcbs before the next agm in july 2021.
"the company raised $5.
3 billion via rights shares and $3.
5 billion via mcbs last year.
it wants to raise another $6.
2 billion via mcbs this year before its agm in july.
while the rights issue was well subscribed, the mcb met with tepid response, resulting in substantial shareholder temasek subscribing to the bulk of it, a point that was raised by sias last week.
as the shareholders had voted for the fund raising, it was their prerogative to decide if they would subscribe to the mcbs, subject to their own financial circumstances, said sia.
in all, sia has raised $15.
4 billion in fresh liquidity since april 1 last year.
this includes the $8.
8 billion in rights shares and mcb last year and another $6.
6 billion through bond issues, secured financing and sale and leaseback transactions.
besides the $6.
2 billion in fresh liquidity that it hopes to raise through the latest mcbs, it also has $2.
1 billion in untapped lines of credit on top of all the other funds raised.
because the mcbs are considered equity, sia has more headroom for further debt financing going forward, if needed.
sia said the proceeds would strengthen its financial foundations to meet ongoing financial commitments, allow it to make the necessary investments and capitalise on any opportunities that may arise so as to secure its industry-leading position, as well as provide resources for growth as it navigates through the ongoing crisis.
"the successful implementation of the group's strategy is also dependent on its ability to retain its talented and motivated employees, and to continue having a strong employer brand to attract new talent," said sia.
it added that it had a pipeline of new-generation aircraft airbus a350s and boeing 787s on order that it could use for further secured financing and sale and leaseback transactions.
the airline expects the proceeds to last well through its 2022/2023 financial year.
it added: "since the beginning of the covid-19 pandemic crisis, our monthly operating cash burn has dropped to the current levels of around $100 million to $150 million per month, from around $350 million at the start of the pandemic.
"we will continue to pursue reduction in cash burn through revenue generation (for example, strong cargo revenue and gradual improvement in passenger flown revenue through more flying activities).
in addition, we will continue to maintain stringent cost management.
"turning to sias' question of whether sia would consider privatisation, the company said: "privatisation is not a matter for sia to consider as it is a shareholder action.
accordingly, sia is not in a position to comment.
"but analysts told the straits times that if privatisation were ever to be contemplated which is unlikely such an exercise could be done only with the approval of majority shareholder temasek.
sia said it was grateful to all shareholders, including retail investors, for their strong support over the years and especially since the start of the covid-19 pandemic.
"our goal is to provide long-term value for shareholders by ensuring that the company returns to profitability and remains a leader in the airline industry as we navigate the challenges posed by the covid-19 pandemic," it said.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
kuala lumpur: the malaysian air force said on tuesday (jun 1) that it scrambled its jets to conduct a visual confirmation, after chinese military transport planes were detected heading towards its national airspace and threatened the country's sovereignty.
in a statement, the royal malaysian air force (rmaf) said it identified 16 people's liberation army air force (plaaf) planes making suspicious flights in malaysia's maritime zone air space, the kota kinabalu flight information region (fir) and approaching the malaysian national airspace on may 31. the planes were identified by the rmaf's defence radar in sarawak at 11.
53am, said the statement.
it also said that the planes flew in an in-trail tactical formation 60 nautical miles from one another.
"the planes flew in that formation using the same point of entry and exit.
the planes then changed (direction), heading to the beting patinggi ali air space which is important to the country.
"the plaaf planes then flew via singapore fir before entering the malaysia maritime zone air space and the kota kinabalu fir, the rmaf statement said, adding that the chinese planes approached within 60 nautical miles of  sarawak beach, "threatening malaysia's sovereignty".
the rmaf then put its hawk 208 jets from no.
6 squadron on high alert, said the statement.
"the plaaf planes were put under continued radar surveillance and were instructed to contact controllers in the kota kinabalu fir.
when these instructions were not heeded and the plaaf planes crossed kota kinabalu fir and headed towards the national airspace, the malaysia air force scrambled intercepting jets at 1.
33pm to perform a visual identification.
""as a result of the air interception carried out, the rmaf has identified the aircraft as ilyushin il-76 and xian y-20 aircraft.
these types of aircraft are strategic transport aircraft and capable of performing various missions.
this incident is a serious matter that threatens national sovereignty and aviation safety, based on the density of air traffic in the airline routes in kota kinabalu fir".
"this incident was handled by the malaysian air force based on protocols by the icao and our national air defence strategy.
the foreign ministry has taken note of this through the defence ministry," the statement added.
"routine flight training"the chinese embassy in malaysia said on tuesday the planes were conducting routine flight training.
"as far as i know, the reported activities are routine flight training of the chinese air force and do not target any country," said a spokesperson.
"chinese military aircraft enjoy the freedom of overflight in the relevant airspace.
"during this training, the chinese military aircraft strictly abided by the relevant international law and did not enter the territorial airspace of any other country.
"the spokesperson said that china and malaysia are friendly neighbors, and that china is willing to continue bilateral friendly consultations with malaysia to jointly maintain regional peace and stability.
china claims much of the south china sea, but there are also overlapping claims by brunei, malaysia, the philippines, taiwan, and vietnam.
washington and its allies have also challenged beijing's territorial claims.
in april last year, malaysian foreign minister hishammuddin hussein called for calm in the south china sea and reaffirmed malaysia's commitment to peace in the disputed waters.
this came after reports that a chinese government survey ship was "tagging" an exploration vessel operated by malaysia's state oil company petronas in the south china sea.
cna has reached out to the civil aviation authority of singapore for comments.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
a public servant has been arrested for allegedly leaking details about the suspension of activities for children and youth under covid-19 safe management measures before they were officially released.
the 32-year-old man was arrested on may 19 for wrongful communication of information under the official secrets act (osa), the police said in a statement yesterday.
the police said they received a report on may 18 that information pertaining to the suspension of sport, physical activity classes and programmes for children and youth aged 18 and below from may 19 to june 13 had been leaked to the public.
the information was circulating via whatsapp before sport singapore's announcement on may 18. the man, who is a public servant and an authorised recipient of the safe management measures for sport and physical activities, allegedly shared the information via the messaging app on may 16 with members of a private chat group.
the recipients were not authorised to receive the classified information.
the information was subsequently further disseminated from that chat group, resulting in wider circulation of the message.
police investigations are ongoing.
the offence of wrongful communication of information carries with it a fine of up to $2,000 and imprisonment for up to two years.
the police have warned that unauthorised recipients should not further circulate confidential information received, as they may be similarly liable under the official secrets act.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore — while there are signs that the community spread of covid-19 is coming under control, it is "very unlikely" that singapore will immediately revert to phase 3 of its re-opening when phase 2 (heightened alert) ends on 13 june, said finance minister lawrence wong on monday (31 may).
"we will have to do this gradually.
.
.
so there is some chance of relaxation, but in a controlled and calibrated manner," said wong, who co-chairs the multi-ministry taskforce on covid-19.
addressing reporters at a virtual press conference, wong noted that the situation remains highly fluid, in response to a question on whether there might be another spike in covid-19 cases.
"if we monitor over time and we see new risks emerging, new clusters emerging, more unlinked cases which we are not able to track down and pin down, then it may suggest that this is continuing, a little bit more than we are comfortable with, and therefore we may have to take additional restrictions or precautions and safeguards, based on the data," he added.
earlier, health minister ong ye kung noted that the number of community cases in the past 14 days – one full infection cycle – has fallen.
by dividing the past 14 days into two halves, the first seven days (17-23 may) saw 182 cases, followed by 136 cases in the next seven days.
in addition, the percentage of unlinked cases has also fallen from 22 per cent of all cases to 18 per cent.
one key method for controlling and monitoring infections is testing, ong said.
in the second half of may, on average, more than 55,000 polymerase chain reaction (pcr) and antigen rapid test (art) tests were conducted each day, according to ong.
"all in all, we are nudging in the right direction, but just nudging, and controlling the situation," said ong.
stay in the know on-the-go: join yahoo singapore's telegram channel at http://t.
me/yahoosingaporerelated stories:possible easing of covid restrictions after 13 june if community cases fall further: lee hsien loongsingapore to make over-the-counter diy covid-19 tests available to residentscovid-19: vaccination bookings for singapore students to begin from 1 june400,000 students in singapore can register for covid vaccine from 1 junesingapore to allow alternative covid-19 vaccines for use by private sectorhousehold members of close contact of covid-19 case to be isolated immediately: pm leecovid vaccination guidelines eased for pregnant, breastfeeding women, cancer patientshousehold contacts of quarantined persons must self-isolate at home: mohmalaysia's air force scrambled jets to intercept 16 chinese military aircraft off the country's coast in the south china sea, a rare incident officials said tuesday threatened "national sovereignty".
the us military will hand over its main bagram air base to afghan forces in about 20 days, an official said tuesday, as washington presses on with withdrawing the last of its troops from the country.
《!》ut,!china on tuesday denied an australian academic's claims that he had been tortured in custody during his two-year detention on espionage charges.
if you've got a citibank credit card, you're in luck.
here are the deals you can enjoy as a citibank credit cardmember (on top of the credit card's own perks).
a well-known global bank, citibank offers some of the best credit cards in singapore.
it [.
.
. ]
the post citibank credit card promotions and deals: june 2021 appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
the employers of an american journalist detained by myanmar authorities said monday they were yet to receive any information on his whereabouts or wellbeing, a week after he was detained.
n1   09:00-13:00   91 | n2    10:00-14:00  716the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
one: full blast might've been a quick replacement for one: empower, but the martial arts spectacle delivered plenty of exciting action.
the show, which aired on friday, 28 may, featured a one super series muay thai main event between a pair of top contenders and a flyweight co-main event between rising stars.
in the evening's final .
.
.
continue reading "saemapetch kos kulabdam, xie tkos agasa at one: full blast"fifteen tutoring firms have been hammered with millions of dollars of fines over alleged fraud, chinese state media said tuesday, as the government's chastening of the tech sector seeps into the private education businesses.
yahoo,,,『,』,!israeli opposition leader yair lapid on monday said many obstacles remain before a diverse coalition can be built to oust veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu, but voiced hope it will achieve the "greater goal".
singapore residents will soon be able to purchase "do-it-yourself" covid-19 tests over the counter at pharmacies, said prime minister lee hsien loong on monday (31 may).
a senior australian cabinet minister on monday dropped a high-profile defamation suit against public broadcaster abc over its publication of rape allegations that helped spark nationwide protests.
!he risked everything to give his baby girl a second chance at life this article, cannabis can mean death in malaysia.
for one dad, it also meant life for his daughter.
, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
china has jailed a popular blogger for "defaming martyrs" after he suggested the death toll of the china-india border clash last year was higher than the official count of four.
turkish spies snatched a nephew of a longtime foe of president recep tayyip erdogan in kenya and brought him back to turkey, media and family said on monday.
「」:$50,1,!from the dark days of italy's 2018 world cup qualifying fiasco to the eve of the european championships, roberto mancini has transformed the fortunes of fallen footballing giants italy.
thousands of doctors across india wore black armbands on tuesday calling for the arrest of a hugely popular guru who has claimed yoga can prevent covid-19 and that conventional medicine has killed thousands of coronavirus patients.
the vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap) aims to provide singaporeans with an added layer of peace of mind when they choose to be vaccinated.
the post vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap): how much will moh be insuring for serious side effects related to covid-19 vaccination?
appeared first on dollarsandsense.
sg.
「」$1,000!
(25) ,,,,2!china has relaxed its family planning policy to allow couples to have three children after a census showed its population is rapidly ageing, state media reported monday, further unwinding four decades of controls in the world's most populous nation which have strangled the birthrate.
how do you deal with noisy neighbours in singapore?
soundproof your home for peace of mind and better work productivity.
here's how you can.
.
.
a major us-australia joint military exercise will go ahead this year despite pandemic concerns but will be significantly scaled-back, a senior australian military officer said tuesday.
scmp columnistmy take  by alex lopublished: 9:00pm, 31 may, 2021updated: 9:00pm, 31 may, 2021
                alex lo
                alex lo has been a post columnist since 2012, covering major issues affecting hong kong and the rest of china.
a journalist for 25 years, he has worked for various publications in hong kong and toronto as a news reporter and editor.
he has also lectured in journalism at the university of hong kong.
indiaworld
singapore: the resorts world sentosa casino was among the new locations added to a list of public places visited by covid-19 cases in the community during their infectious period.
also added to the list was ntuc foodfare at 476d upper serangoon view, where a covid-19 case had worked.
the worker, who was reported as a community case on monday, is a kitchen assistant at hua zai hk style roasted delights at foodfare outlets at both 308 anchorvale road and 476d upper serangoon view.
he was one of two new cases added to the ntuc foodfare cluster, which now has a total of nine infections.
also added to a list of public places visited by covid-19 cases were sri murugan hill temple in bukit timah, quan shui wet market in bukit batok and the giant supermarket at sunshine place in choa chu kang.
the list of new locations is as follows:those identified as close contacts of cases would have been notified by moh.
as a precautionary measure, individuals who were at these locations during the specified timings should monitor their health closely for 14 days from the date of their visit.
"they should see a doctor promptly if they develop symptoms of acute respiratory infection (such as cough, sore throat and runny nose), as well as fever and loss of taste or smell, and inform the doctor of their exposure history," said the ministry.
there is no need to avoid places where confirmed cases of covid-19 have been, added moh.
"the national environment agency will engage the management of affected premises to provide guidance on cleaning and disinfection," said the health ministry.
singapore reported 23 new covid-19 cases on monday, including 16 infections in the community.
of the community cases, 13 were linked to previous infections.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore: the warm and humid weather in may is expected to continue into the first half of june, the meteorological service singapore (mss) said on tuesday (jun 1).
in the first fortnight of june, the nights are also expected to be warm and humid, with night-time minimum temperatures of up to 28 degrees celsius expected on some days.
warm nights typically occur when the prevailing winds blow from the southeast and brings warm, humid air from the sea over the land, mss said.
the daily temperature is forecast to range between 25 degrees celsius and 34 degrees celsius on most days, with the mercury potentially hitting 35 degrees celsius on a few days when there are few clouds in the sky.
the prevailing light and variable winds over singapore and the surrounding region are forecast to strengthen and blow from the southeast or southwest.
this signals the end of the inter-monsoon period and the start of the southwest monsoon season, which typically extends into september and is a generally drier season compared to other times of the year.
the monsoon rain band is forecast to lie over the northern southeast asia region, bringing generally dry, warm, and humid conditions over singapore and the surrounding region on some days.
on several days, there will be localised short-duration showers, at times with thunder, over a few parts of the island in the late morning and early afternoon.
"on one or two days, sumatra squalls moving from the strait of malacca to the south china sea are expected to bring island-wide thundery showers with occasional gusty winds in the morning," said the met service.
the overall rainfall for the first half of june 2021 is likely to be below normal over most parts of singapore.
review of may weatherin its review for the weather last month, the met service said that inter-monsoon conditions prevailed over singapore and the surrounding region, and the prevailing winds were generally light and blew from the east, southeast or southwest.
thundery showers fell over parts of the island on most days, mainly in the late morning and afternoon.
they were due to strong daytime heating of land areas, a convergence of winds over singapore and the surrounding vicinity, or a combination of both factors, the met service said.
the heaviest thundery showers during the month occurred on may 17 and may 18, particularly over the western and central parts of the island.
on both occasions, a convergence of winds over singapore and the surrounding vicinity brought thundery showers in the late morning, early afternoon and in the night.
in may, the highest rainfall of 117.
2mm was recorded on may 17 at jurong west, while the highest daily total was 132.
0mm, recorded at toa payoh.
"climatologically, may is one of the warmest months of the year," said the met service.
the highest daily maximum temperature recorded across the island was at least 34 degrees celsius on 18 days, with the peak 35.
7 degrees celsius recorded at marina barrage on may 11. there were also a few warm nights where the night-time temperature was around 28 degrees celsius, particularly over the south-eastern part of the island.
rainfall was slightly above average for most parts of singapore in may.
the highest rainfall anomaly of 69 per cent above average was recorded at jurong.
the anomaly was lowest at kranji at 56 per cent below average.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
putrajaya: a total of 82,341 infants and children in malaysia have tested positive for covid-19 to date, health minister adham baba said on monday (may 31).
giving a breakdown of the numbers, dr adham said 19,851 cases were children below the age of four, with 8,237 cases involving those aged five to six.
a total of 26,851 cases were aged seven to 12, while 27,402 were aged 13 to 17. no one is in the intensive care unit, said dr adham.
expressing concern over the numbers, dr adham advised parents or guardians to be more responsible in protecting children from being infected, such as by avoiding crowded places.
he added that although there is no provision under the law to fine parents who take their children to crowded places, investigation papers can be opened.
malaysia on monday reported 6,824 new covid-19 cases, taking the national total to 572,357. there were also 67 more covid-19 fatalities and a record 851 patients in the intensive care unit, with 422 requiring respiratory support.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
indiaworld
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore tong shing contractors was fined $41,500 for damaging a water main and carrying out works without approval from singapore's water agency pub.
in a statement on tuesday (june 1), pub said the damage to the water pipe led to the loss of 1.
8 million litres of water, enough to fill about two-thirds of an olympic-size swimming pool.
the water leak had affected three traffic lanes in admiralty road west near the junction of dahan road when the incident occurred in december 2018. tong shing was carrying out pipe-jacking works as part of a road-widening project when the pipe-jacking machine punctured the water main, which has a diameter of 70cm, at a depth of about 3.
7m below the road surface.
pub uncovered a hole with a diameter of 30cm on the water main when it went on site to isolate the leak and repair the damage.
its investigations found that tong shing had failed to physically ascertain the exact location and alignment of the water main before the works began.
in addition, tong shing had proceeded with the pipe-jacking works without submitting a plan to do so for pub's approval.
on tuesday, pub reminded contractors that it takes a serious view of water main damage and the water wastage that can be prevented if due diligence is exercised.
"contractors should always refer to pub's advisory on the prevention of damage to water pipe infrastructure before carrying out any construction works," said pub.
under the public utilities act, those who damage a water main or connecting pipe with a diameter of 30cm or more can face a fine of up to $200,000, jail for up to three years, or both.
contractors who carry out works in the vicinity of water mains without an approved plan can be fined up to $10,000.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
beijing: fifteen tutoring firms have been hammered with millions of dollars of fines over alleged fraud, chinese state media said on tuesday (jun 1), as the government's chastening of the tech sector seeps into the private education businesses.
the groups including major brands like zuoyebang, which counts alibaba as an investor, and tencent-backed yuanfudao were hit with fines amounting to 36.
5 million yuan (us$5.
7 million).
after issuing fines and warnings to tech companies spanning e-commerce, gaming, video streaming and food deliveries, beijing has in recent days turned its attention towards tutoring start-ups, many of them online.
the penalties follow a warning by president xi jinping in march of problems in the education sector, including excessive pressure on young students.
a number of potential initial public offerings for companies running learning apps have since ground to a halt, reported bloomberg news on monday, naming both zuoyebang and yuanfudao among those that were holding off preparations.
the education ministry also plans to create a division overseeing private education platforms, the report added.
on tuesday, china's market watchdog said an investigation into the 15 institutions which include online apps alleged they had engaged in "false advertising", with many also found to have conducted "price fraud".
for example, bond education is accused of inflating a package of trial classes to 420 yuan and offering it at an apparent discount of 12 yuan, state broadcaster cctv reported.
among other wrongdoings were "fabricating teacher qualifications, exaggerating the effects of training .
.
.
and fabricating user reviews", according to the state administration for market regulation.
the services aimed to induce parents to fork over money, said regulators.
this follows similar practices by zuoyebang and yuanfudao that authorities flagged in may, including a false claim by zuoyebang of a collaboration with the united nations.
intense competition starting from a young age has amplified the pressure on china's parents to pay extra to get their children ahead in the congested education system.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
in an earlier statement, osaka said she did not want her stance to become a distraction and said that she had been dealing with mental health issues since 2018. williams, 39, was inevitably asked for her reaction to osaka's decision following her first-round win over romanian irina-camelia begu.
"the only thing i feel is that i feel for naomi.
i feel like i wish i could give her a hug because i know what it's like.
like i said, i've been in those positions.
"we have different personalities, and people are different.
not everyone is the same.
i'm thick (skinned).
other people are thin.
everyone is different and everyone handles things differently.
"malaysia's air force scrambled jets to intercept 16 chinese military aircraft off the country's coast in the south china sea, a rare incident officials said tuesday threatened "national sovereignty".
the us military will hand over its main bagram air base to afghan forces in about 20 days, an official said tuesday, as washington presses on with withdrawing the last of its troops from the country.
《!》ut,!china on tuesday denied an australian academic's claims that he had been tortured in custody during his two-year detention on espionage charges.
if you've got a citibank credit card, you're in luck.
here are the deals you can enjoy as a citibank credit cardmember (on top of the credit card's own perks).
a well-known global bank, citibank offers some of the best credit cards in singapore.
it [.
.
. ]
the post citibank credit card promotions and deals: june 2021 appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
the employers of an american journalist detained by myanmar authorities said monday they were yet to receive any information on his whereabouts or wellbeing, a week after he was detained.
!marla40,.
$50,.
the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
one: full blast might've been a quick replacement for one: empower, but the martial arts spectacle delivered plenty of exciting action.
the show, which aired on friday, 28 may, featured a one super series muay thai main event between a pair of top contenders and a flyweight co-main event between rising stars.
in the evening's final .
.
.
continue reading "saemapetch kos kulabdam, xie tkos agasa at one: full blast"fifteen tutoring firms have been hammered with millions of dollars of fines over alleged fraud, chinese state media said tuesday, as the government's chastening of the tech sector seeps into the private education businesses.
,,,,!israeli opposition leader yair lapid on monday said many obstacles remain before a diverse coalition can be built to oust veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu, but voiced hope it will achieve the "greater goal".
singapore residents will soon be able to purchase "do-it-yourself" covid-19 tests over the counter at pharmacies, said prime minister lee hsien loong on monday (31 may).
a senior australian cabinet minister on monday dropped a high-profile defamation suit against public broadcaster abc over its publication of rape allegations that helped spark nationwide protests.
「」kol//,/.
he risked everything to give his baby girl a second chance at life this article, cannabis can mean death in malaysia.
for one dad, it also meant life for his daughter.
, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
china has jailed a popular blogger for "defaming martyrs" after he suggested the death toll of the china-india border clash last year was higher than the official count of four.
turkish spies snatched a nephew of a longtime foe of president recep tayyip erdogan in kenya and brought him back to turkey, media and family said on monday.
all asset classes.
industry-leading prices.
user-friendly investing online.
from the dark days of italy's 2018 world cup qualifying fiasco to the eve of the european championships, roberto mancini has transformed the fortunes of fallen footballing giants italy.
thousands of doctors across india wore black armbands on tuesday calling for the arrest of a hugely popular guru who has claimed yoga can prevent covid-19 and that conventional medicine has killed thousands of coronavirus patients.
the vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap) aims to provide singaporeans with an added layer of peace of mind when they choose to be vaccinated.
the post vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap): how much will moh be insuring for serious side effects related to covid-19 vaccination?
appeared first on dollarsandsense.
sg.
citi | wharton global wealth institute,china has relaxed its family planning policy to allow couples to have three children after a census showed its population is rapidly ageing, state media reported monday, further unwinding four decades of controls in the world's most populous nation which have strangled the birthrate.
how do you deal with noisy neighbours in singapore?
soundproof your home for peace of mind and better work productivity.
here's how you can.
.
.
a major us-australia joint military exercise will go ahead this year despite pandemic concerns but will be significantly scaled-back, a senior australian military officer said tuesday.
subtotalcalculating.
.
.
coupon (free50)s$0.
00shipping chargecalculating.
.
.
subtotal (excluding taxes)calculating.
.
.
gstcalculating.
.
.
order totalcalculating.
.
.
download our mobile app to bring our news with you on the go.
check your email for more details.
do you want to customise your notebook now?
want our latest singapore corporate news stories for
                      
                      free
                      

                    follow our telegram, facebook for the latest updates round the clock
                thank you!please check your email inbox to confirm your newsletter subscription.
unlimited access to all stories from $99.
9/year*the latest reporting and analysis from business and investments to news and views on social issues.
bonus:
end of contentno more pages to loadmay 31, 2021may 28, 2021may 30, 2021may 31, 2021may 31, 2021
               want our latest singapore corporate news stories for 
               free
               

                    follow our telegram, facebook for the latest updates round the clock
                thank you!please check your email inbox to confirm your newsletter subscription.
follow us© all rights reserved.
2021. the edge publishing pte ltd.
singapore — shares in major asia-pacific markets were mostly higher on tuesday, as investors reacted to the release of a private survey on chinese manufacturing activity in may.
mainland chinese stocks closed higher, with the shanghai composite up 0.
26% to 3,624.
71 and the shenzhen component rising 0.
256% to 15,034.
78.  hong kong's hang seng index rose about 0.
9%, as of its final hour of trading.
the caixin/markit manufacturing purchasing managers' index (pmi) for may came in at 52, higher than expectations for a reading of 51.
9 by analysts in a reuters poll.
the figure for may also compared against april's reading of 51.
9. the official manufacturing pmi for may, released monday, came in 51.
0 — slightly lower than analyst expectations for a reading of 51.
1 in a reuters poll.
pmi readings above 50 represent expansion while those below that level signify contraction.
pmi readings are sequential and represent month-on-month expansion or contraction.
japan's nikkei 225 slipped 0.
16% to close at 28,814.
34 while the topix index edged 0.
17% higher to finish the trading day at 1,926.
18.  south korea's kospi closed 0.
56% higher at 3,221.
87. shares in australia slipped, with the s&p/asx 200 declining 0.
27% on the day to 7,142.
60.  the reserve bank of australia on tuesday announced its decision to hold steady on its current policy settings, including keeping the cash rate at 0.
1%.
msci's broadest index of asia-pacific shares outside japan rose 0.
55%.
over in southeast asia, the ftse bursa malaysia klci index hovered above the flatline, as of 3:22 p. m.  local time.
malaysia's prime minister on monday announced an additional 40 billion ringgit (about $9.
7 billion) stimulus package, just hours before stricter lockdown measures to curb the covid spread in the country were set to kick in.
oil prices were higher in the afternoon of asia trading hours, with international benchmark brent crude futures up 1.
51% to $70.
37 per barrel.
u. s.  crude futures advanced 2.
26% to $67.
82 per barrel.
the u. s.  dollar index, which tracks the greenback against a basket of its peers, was at 89.
751 — falling below the 90 level again.
the japanese yen traded at 109.
46 per dollar, stronger than levels above 110 against the greenback seen late last week.
the australian dollar changed hands at $0.
7751, still below levels above $0.
776 seen last week.
got a confidential news tip?
we want to hear from you.
sign up for free newsletters and get more cnbc delivered to your inboxget this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services.
© 2021 cnbc llc.
all rights reserved.
a division of nbcuniversaldata is a real-time snapshot *data is delayed at least 15 minutes.
global business and financial news, stock quotes, and market data and analysis.
data also provided by
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore the ongoing warm and humid weather is set to continue over the next fortnight, with rainfall expected to be below average over the majority of the island, said the weatherman on tuesday (june 1).
in an advisory, the meteorological service singapore (mss) said the start of the south-west monsoon season typically extends into september and brings about a generally drier season compared with other times of the year.
dry, warm and humid conditions are expected due to the proximity of the monsoon rain band to the northern south-east asia region.
on some days, short-duration showers at times with thunder are expected in the late morning and early afternoon over parts of the island.
widespread thundery showers and occasional gusty winds are expected in the morning on a few days due to sumatra squalls moving from the strait of malacca to the south china sea, mss said.
meanwhile, warm and humid conditions are expected on most nights in the coming fortnight, with minimum temperatures of up to 28 deg c. this is due to prevailing winds blowing from the south-east and bringing warm and humid air from the sea.
the daily temperature is forecast to range between 25 deg c and 34 deg c, while the daily maximum temperature could reach about 35 deg c on a few days, especially when there are few clouds in the sky.
the coming fortnight's weather brings an end to inter-monsoon conditions in may, when thundery showers fell in the late morning and afternoon on most days due to heating of land areas in the day.
rainfall was especially heavy on may 17 and 18, particularly over the western and central parts of the singapore, said mss.
the daily total rainfall of 132mm recorded in toa payoh on may 18 was the highest rainfall recorded for may.
many parts of singapore also recorded rainfall that was slightly above average in may.
the rainfall anomaly was highest in jurong, at 69 per cent above average.
still, may was a warm month, with the highest daily maximum temperature at least 34 deg c on most days.
the highest daily maximum temperature of 35.
7 deg c was recorded at marina barrage on may 11. join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
dozens of grassroots people's defence forces have emerged to take on brutal militarylast modified on tue 1 jun 2021 05.
16 bstmyanmar is on the verge of a new civil war, a spokesperson for the country's parallel government has warned, as communities increasingly take up arms to protect themselves from a relentless campaign of military violence.
conflict has raged for decades in myanmar's borderlands, where myriad ethnic armed groups are fighting with the military for greater autonomy.
since february's coup, however, dozens of new, grassroots people's defence forces have emerged to oppose the junta, with battles occurring in areas of the country that were previously peaceful.
"the people of myanmar have been left with no other choice.
they just have no other option left," said dr sasa, spokesperson for myanmar's national unity government (nug), which was set up by pro-democracy politicians.
the constant threat of military raids, arrests, torture and killings had pushed communities to take up arms, he said.
"it is just the beginning.
the situation will become out of control.
even if it is one man in a village, they will not just bow in front of these murderers.
it is the whole country on the road to civil war," sasa said.
over the past week, tens of thousands of people have been displaced in eastern kayah state by intense fighting between the military, the newly formed karenni people's defence force and the karenni army, an established ethnic armed group.
on monday evening, the military used helicopters to bomb and fire at civilian fighters, the karenni people's defence force told local media.
"we attacked with light weapons but they responded with artillery shells," a the kpdf member told the independent outlet myanmar now.
at least 58 defence forces have formed across the country, of which 12 are active, according to the armed conflict location and event data project (acled), a non-profit that tracks conflict.
these groups are formed at a local level and are not necessarily officially linked to the nug.
groups have revealed little about the nature of their training, but their resources and intensity vary.
in the town of mindat in chin state, one of the poorest areas of the country, volunteers armed with little more than traditional hunting guns rose up against the military in may.
elsewhere, young city dwellers have fled to the jungle to learn how to make homemade explosives.
celebrities are among those who have announced that they are joining training – from a former beauty queen who represented myanmar in the miss grand international contest, htar htet htet, to han htoo lwin, known as kyar pauk, the lead singer of punk rock band big bag.
in myanmar's biggest city, yangon, members of the security forces have been targeted in a wave of attacks over the past week, including shootings and explosions.
a wedding party was also targeted, reportedly because the groom was suspected of being a military informant.
four people were killed – including the bride – after a bomb was disguised as a gift, according to local media.
no one has claimed responsibility for the blasts.
schools across the country, some of which have been occupied by the military, have been bombed or set alight by unknown perpetrators, in what may be an attempt to reinforce the shutdown of the education system by anti-coup protesters.
the junta has ordered parents to register their children to return to school, but the vast majority have not done so.
more than half of the teachers working in state schools are on strike, according to local media.
such attacks, including the targeting of individuals suspected of colluding with the military, were a worrying trend, said richard horsey, senior myanmar adviser to crisis group.
"it will be difficult to contain once this kind of violence becomes the norm.
it's hard to shut these dynamics down again later.
"the nug, which has spoken of plans to build a new federal army, has urged anti-coup groups to follow ethical guidelines and not target schools or hospitals.
it released a video on saturday showing the first batch of defence force troops who have finished training.
some ethnic armed groups have offered support to anti-coup forces, though others are ambivalent.
groups could seek to exploit the coup for their own territorial gains, further complicating the crisis.
anti-coup defence forces face an infamously brutal military that has an estimated 400,000 armed personnel, making it the second largest in south-east asia after vietnam's.
it is supplied primarily by china and russia, drawing on generous state funding as well as its lucrative business networks – which campaigners are trying to weaken by placing pressure on international companies.
sasa is calling for the international community to recognise the nug as the official leaders of myanmar.
doing so, he said, would help the body to demand that oil and gas companies, such as total and chevron, hand over payments to democratic officials rather than army generals.
"it is an insult to us that the gas that is from the land of myanmar is being used by these military generals, and being paid for by total company or [other] western companies, to buy weapons from russia and china to kill the people of myanmar," he said.
nine neighbouring south-east asian countries have reportedly proposed that a draft un resolution be weakened by removing a call for an arms embargo.
sasa called for like-minded countries to push for the measure, and to introduce tougher, targeted sanctions.
the more the international community delayed, he added, "the more bloody it will become, the closer we get to civil war and genocide".
more battles are already reported to have taken place in myanmar in the first half of 2021 than in the entirety of last year, according to acled.
it has also tracked sharp increases in reports of attacks on civilians, and reports of explosions and other forms of remote violence, which include the deployment of artillery, shelling, grenades or ieds.
previously, conflict was concentrated in rakhine state and northern shan state, but it has now spread more widely across the country.
this is likely to place pressure on local commanders, said horsey, but it is hard to know what impact it will have on the military as a whole.
"they are quite large, they have a lot of military resources and they are not concerned at all about civilian casualties.
in fact, their whole approach to internal conflict over the decades has been to deliberately target civilians as part of a quite brutal counter-insurgency strategy," horsey said.
salai za uk ling, deputy executive director of the chin human rights organization, said people from mindat reported the military had used civilians as human shields during recent clashes.
thousands of people from the town remain stranded just as the rainy season was beginning, he said.
"they say they are getting very, very desperate.
there has been some delivery of food aid and basic medical aid from volunteers, but there has been no large-scale delivery," he added, warning of an impending humanitarian crisis.
covid-19 is also spreading along the indian border.
at least 833 people have been killed by the military since it seized power in february, according to estimates by the advocacy group assistance association for political prisoners burma.
thousands have been detained, often in unknown locations where they are at risk of torture.
an activist who has met young people who are training to fight the military, and who asked to remain anonymous, said volunteers believed violence was the only language the military understood.
"they want to scare the soldiers coming into their communities making arrests, beating and torturing," she said.
"some people are hoteliers, some have their own restaurants, bars – and they have now left all their businesses.
"one young medical student had fled alone to train, the activist said.
"she was so passionate because her friends got killed.
her place was terrorised under martial law.
she saw people burning alive in front of her.
that experience pushed her to pick up the gun. "
geneva: the world health organization (who) on tuesday (jun 1) approved the sinovac covid-19 vaccine for emergency use the second chinese jab to receive the who's green light.
the un health agency signed off on the two-dose vaccine, which is already being deployed in several countries around the world.
"who today validated the sinovac-coronavac covid-19 vaccine for emergency use," it said in a statement.
the move gives countries, funders, procuring agencies and communities "assurance that it meets international standards for safety, efficacy and manufacturing".
last month sinopharm became the first chinese vaccine to be approved by the who.
the organisation has also given emergency use listing to vaccines being made by pfizer-biontech, moderna, johnson & johnson, and the astrazeneca jab being produced in india, south korea and the eu, which it counts separately.
who's listing paves the way for countries worldwide to quickly approve and import a vaccine for distribution, especially those states without an international-standard regulator of their own.
it also opens the door for the jabs to enter the covax global vaccine-sharing scheme, which aims to provide equitable access to doses around the world, particularly in poorer countries.
currently only astrazeneca and some pfizer jabs are flowing through the scheme.
"the world desperately needs multiple covid-19 vaccines to address the huge access inequity across the globe," said mariangela simao, the who's assistant director general for access to health products.
"we urge manufacturers to participate in the covax facility, share their know-how and data and contribute to bringing the pandemic under control.
"the sinovac jab is already in use in 22 territories around the world, according to an afp count.
apart from china, the countries using sinovac include chile, brazil, indonesia, mexico, thailand and turkey.
the who's strategic advisory group of experts on immunisation have reviewed the jab and published their advice on its usage.
"who recommends the vaccine for use in adults 18 years and older, in a two-dose schedule with a spacing of two to four weeks," the agency said.
"vaccine efficacy results showed that the vaccine prevented symptomatic disease in 51 per cent of those vaccinated and prevented severe covid-19 and hospitalisation in 100 per cent of the studied population.
"downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
coronavirus variants with clunky, alphanumeric names have now been assigned the letters of the greek alphabet in a bid to simplify discussion and pronunciation while avoiding stigma.
the world health organisation revealed the new names on monday (may 31) amid criticism that those given by scientists such as the so-called south african variant which goes by multiple names including b.
1.
351, 501y.
v2 and 20h/501y.
v2 were too complicated.
as such, the four coronavirus variants considered of concern by the un agency and known generally by the public as the uk, south africa, brazil and india variants have now been given the letters alpha, beta, gamma, delta according to the order of their detection.
other variants of interest continue down the alphabet.
"while they have their advantages, these scientific names can be difficult to say and recall, and are prone to misreporting," said the who, explaining the decision.
the choice of the greek alphabet came after months of deliberations in which other possibilities such as greek gods and invented, pseudo-classical names were considered by experts, according to bacteriologist mark pallen who was involved in the talks.
but many were already brands, companies or alien names.
another idea to refer to variants of concern as voc1, voc2 etc.
was scrapped after he pointed out it resembled an english swear word.
[[nid:530063]]historically, viruses have often been associated with the locations from which they are thought to have emerged such as ebola which is named after the eponymous congolese river.
but this can be damaging for the places and often inaccurate such as with the so-called 'spanish flu' pandemic of 1918 whose origins are unknown.
"no country should be stigmatised for detecting and reporting variants," said who epidemiologist maria van kerkhove.
before the new who scheme, some scientists had adopted their own simplified nomenclature for variants such as a february paper using bird names.
however, it was criticised on the grounds that this could imperil birds and by the mother of a girl named 'robin'.
west midlands police say they will 'leave no stone unturned' in the hunt for those responsible for this shocking crimefind your bookmarks in your independent premium section, under my profiledespite paramedics best efforts, nothing could be done to save the 14-year-old boy who died at the scene.
a teenage boy was stabbed to death near a mcdonald's in birmingham on the evening of the bank holiday monday.
the 14-year-old was attacked in kingstanding, north of the city, by up to seven people.
despite paramedics' best efforts, west midlands police said: "sadly, nothing could be done to save him," and the boy died at the scene.
a murder investigation has been launched, and west midlands police say the area where the stabbing took place has being flooded with officers to search for the offenders; officers are also speaking with witnesses and fast-tracking cctv inquiries.
detective inspector ranj sangha, of the force's homicide unit characterised the crime as "a shocking and senseless tragedy".
he said: "we will be leaving no stone unturned in our hunt for the callous individuals responsible for this, or anyone harbouring them, knowing what they have done.
"jack dromey, the area's labour mp called the attack on the teenager "truly shocking" whilst sending his condolences to the family.
he also urged anyone with information about the incident to contact the west midlands police.
anyone who can assist the investigation is asked to contact the police through the live chat on the force's website, calling 101 and quoting log 3313 of 31/5, or calling crimestoppers anonymously on 0800 555 111. join thought-provoking conversations, follow other independent readers and see their repliesdespite paramedics best efforts, nothing could be done to save the 14-year-old boy who died at the scene.
getty imageswant to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later?
start your independent premium subscription today.
log innew to the independent?want an ad-free experience?subscribe to independent premium.
yangon: schools in myanmar will open on tuesday (jun 1) for the first time since the military seized power, but teachers and students are set to defy the junta's calls for full classrooms in a show of resistance.
four months of national turmoil have followed the february ouster of civilian leader aung san suu kyi, with more than 800 people killed by security forces and a nationwide strike crippling the economy.
public school teachers dressed in the green and white uniforms mandated by the education ministry were prominent in the early mass protests, joining railway workers, doctors and civil servants on the streets.
the junta has insisted schools open on tuesday after a year's absence due to covid-19, but many educators had already decided they could not return to a job they love.
"i'm not afraid of their arrest and torture," shwe nadi, a teacher from the commercial capital yangon told afp.
her name has been changed for her safety.
"i'm afraid of becoming a teacher who teaches the students propaganda.
"the 28-year-old was fired for supporting the civil disobedience movement one of the thousands of teachers and academics the junta has sacked.
"of course, i feel bad losing my job because i loved being a teacher.
although it is not well paid, we have our pride for being teachers as others respect us," she said.
nu may not her real name in southern mon state will also stay away, she told afp.
the primary school teacher lost months of her salary after joining the nationwide boycott, but said "my soul is pure" because she participated in the strike.
"when i see how they have killed a lot of people, i feel i don't want to be their teacher any more," she added.
some of those killed in the junta's crackdown were of primary school age, and charity group save the children said the dead include 15 children under the age of 16.
"we don't want traitors"junta-run media has in recent days carried pictures of functionaries watching school registrations and promising that parents will be "satisfied" with the return of classes.
students at a school near the capital naypyidaw opened a setpiece ceremony to mark the new term by performing a "national enrolment week" song in front of the regime's education minister, according to the global new light of myanmar state newspaper.
but at one high school in central sagaing region, a slogan daubed in red paint across the front of the building urges staff members to stay away.
"we do not want the military slavery teachers," showed pictures carried by local media.
"we do not want the teachers who are traitors.
"university students were key drivers of political activism under nearly five decades of earlier military rulers, who violently suppressed any signs of public dissent.
many students back then were killed, jailed or expelled, and universities were shuttered for several years.
"not one of my friends is going"some university classes are already back in session, but boycotts have seen widespread absences on both sides of the teaching lectern.
"not one of my friends is going," said an english major at a university in mawlamyine, a city that saw brutal crackdowns by security forces against protesters.
"so i decided not to go too.
"her class of 100 is now empty, despite students being summoned by the few remaining professors on campus.
protesters have discouraged parents and teachers from sending children to schools that still have teachers willing to work, saying it amounted to backing the military regime.
"do not be sad when you cannot enrol your child at school when some parents have no children to enrol," read a banner in bago region, south of the capital.
teacher shwe nadi said she will remain committed to the civil disobedience movement, despite fears of being detained or worse.
"i won't run because i have not committed any crimes," she said.
"if they want to arrest me, i am prepared.
"it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore: residents at two more blocks at hougang avenue 8 will have to undergo mandatory covid-19 tests, after traces of the virus were found in wastewater samples taken from those blocks.
there have not been any confirmed covid-19 cases at those blocks, said the ministry of health (moh) on monday (may 31).
the polymerase chain reaction testing for residents at blocks 501 and 507 hougang avenue 8 will take place from jun 1 to 3.  testing will be conducted at the void deck of block 507 hougang avenue 8 between 9am and 4pm on those dates.
"while there are currently no confirmed cases residing at 501 and 507 hougang avenue 8, covid-19 viral fragments were detected in wastewater samples collected from these blocks," the ministry said.
"as a precautionary measure, we will conduct mandatory covid-19 tests for all residents of these blocks.
"the health ministry also advised residents to monitor their health and consult a doctor immediately if they feel unwell.
"leaflets will be distributed and sms notifications will be sent to the residents to provide them with more information," said moh.
the move is part of the ministry's surveillance measures to detect and prevent the spread of covid-19 cases in the community.
"this mandatory testing is carried out when epidemiology investigations have assessed that there is likely ongoing transmission," it said.
"in the event that a positive case is detected, moh will isolate the case, identify all close contacts, test and quarantine them to protect the community from further transmission.
"earlier this month, the ministrytested all residents of block 506 hougang avenue 8after some residents tested positive for covid-19.
eleven covid-19 cases from at least four different households living at the block, including two who were detected from the mandatory testing exercise.
residents atblock 559 pasir ris st 51were also tested last week after four covid-19 cases were detected in two different households living in the block.
on monday, moh also announced mandatory testing for all residents ofblock 745 yishun street 72, after six covid-19 cases were detected there.
the need for the mandatory tests at the yishun block was first announced by mp faishal ibrahim (pap-nee soon) in a facebook post on monday afternoon.
singapore reported 23 new covid-19 cases on monday, including 16 infections in the community.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
madam rini saadon has been reading with a heavy heart recent news reports of schoolchildren getting infected with the covid-19 virus.
a mother of four, including a pair of twin boys in secondary 3, the homemaker was also concerned for the well-being of her children.
it is why yesterday's announcement that students in singapore will soon be able to get vaccinated comes as a relief.
her twins will be among more than 400,000 students who will be invited to book their covid-19 jabs from today, education minister chan chun sing announced yesterday.
the earliest vaccination slots will be from thursday.
his announcement came after prime minister lee hsien loong gave an update on the covid-19 situation here in a live broadcast on national television, while also providing an overview of singapore's vaccination, testing and contact tracing strategy going forward.
the vaccination exercise will kick off with the 56,000 students who will be sitting for the n, o, and a levels, as well as other equivalent qualifications, such as the international baccalaureate diploma, in the second half of this year, the ministry of education (moe) said.
over the next two weeks, the invitations will be progressively extended to other full-time students, including those in institutes of higher learning, madrasahs and special education (sped) schools.
speaking at a virtual multi-ministry task force press conference after the pm's speech, mr chan said: "all medically eligible individuals are encouraged to consider getting vaccinated when the vaccination is offered to them.
"and we would like to thank all parents for working closely with our educators and schools to keep our children safe.
"students who are 18 and above will receive an sms containing a unique link for them to book a slot for the first dose of the vaccine at any of the vaccination centres around singapore.
the second dose will be given around six to eight weeks later.
for children under 18, who will need parental consent to take the jabs, the sms invitations will be sent to their parents or guardians.
those below 13 will have to be accompanied by their parents or guardians during their jab.
those aged 18 and above will have a choice of either the pfizer-biontech or moderna vaccines.
those between 12 and 17 will be offered only the pfizer-biontech jab.
four dedicated moe vaccination centres will be set up from next monday to support the vaccination roll-out for students.
they include three centres at the institute of technical education (ite) college campuses in ang mo kio, choa chu kang and simei, and one at the raffles city convention centre.
the ite centres will be able to administer 1,600 vaccine doses a day, while the raffles city centre can do 2,000 doses a day.
the ite will arrange for their students to take their shots on campus, and the ministry of health (moh) will send mobile vaccination teams to sped schools as the students may find it challenging to visit a vaccination site.
schools will also look into alternative vaccination arrangements for those who need extra support when schools reopen after the current june holidays, including providing transport to the vaccination centres, moe said.
the vaccination exercise for students is estimated to be completed by august.
madam rini's eldest son, adam naufal, 15, said he understands the importance of the vaccination.
the loyang view secondary school student said: "while i am a little worried about the fever and body aches after the jab, i will still get vaccinated.
"madam rini said that some of her friends whose children have a history of illness or allergies have concerns over safety and will be more cautious and do more research before sending their children for the vaccine.
"it is understandable to be more careful when it comes to our children's health," she added.
at yesterday's press conference, moh's director of medical services kenneth mak said that based on the ongoing phase three studies that involve nearly 2,300 adolescents between the ages of 12 and 16, there was a very high vaccine efficacy in the vaccinated group.
he added: "we will be watching very closely the experience of others, in the us, in israel, and it will guide our policy even as we start our own programme to offer vaccinations to our schoolchildren.
"to address parents' questions and concerns about the vaccines, moe will be partnering with moh to organise webinars for them.
mr woon wui tek, a father of two sons aged 13 and 10, hopes his older son can get vaccinated before he returns to school in july.
the 48-year-old who works in a bank said: "based on the medical evidence up to now, i don't see any reason why he should not be vaccinated.
"singapore management university student lareina chan, 19, said it is important for undergrads to get vaccinated as most like to hang out in groups for projects and outings.
"dr ling li min, an infectious disease physician from rophi clinic, said this latest move is a positive step in the nation's fight against the virus.
she said: "the vaccine will protect the kids from covid and against rare severe complications such as the post-covid multi-inflammatory syndrome, as well as reduce risk of transmission to their more vulnerable household members.
"the pfizer study has shown that the vaccine is safe and works very well.
the vaccine does not stay in the body it will not impact the child's growth.
getting all eligible students vaccinated will go far in achieving effective population herd immunity.
"get the new paper on your phone with the free tnp app.
download from the apple app store or google play store now
moscow: russia said on monday (may 31) it would send what it described as "uncomfortable" signals to the us ahead of a summit between the leaders of the two countries next month and announced it was beefing up its western border militarily.
the comments came a day after us president joe biden said he would press russian president vladimir putin to respect human rights when the two leaders meet in geneva on jun 16.  relations between the two powers are at post-cold war lows.
"the americans must assume that a number of signals from moscow .
.
.
will be uncomfortable for them, including in the coming days," sergei ryabkov, russia's deputy foreign minister, was quoted as saying by the ria news agency.
ryabkov said russia would be prepared to respond to biden's queries about human rights in russia and said that moscow was being more flexible than washington when it came to drawing up an agenda for the summit, ria reported.
russia's ties with the west are acutely strained over the jailing of kremlin critic alexei navalny, a military build-up near ukraine as well as allegations of election hacking.
defence minister sergei shoigu said on monday that the us and the nato transatlantic alliance had recently increased military activity to the west of russia, which required a response from moscow.
"the actions of our western colleagues are destroying the world's security system and force us to take adequate countermeasures," the interfax news agency quoted shoigu as saying.
"around 20 military formations and units will be formed in the western military district by the end of the year," he was quoted as saying.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.

                    tuesday, 01 jun 2021
                duopharma biotech said the supply of the 6.
4 million doses of the sputnik v vaccine is subject to the approval by the drug control authority of malaysia, as well as other terms and conditions of supply.
kuala lumpur: duopharma biotech bhd has concluded the supply agreements with the malaysian government and russian direct investment fund (rdif) for the supply of 6.
4 million doses of the sputnik v vaccine.
in a statement on tuesday, it said the supply of the vaccine is subject to the approval of the vaccine by the drug control authority of malaysia, as well as other terms and conditions of supply.
sputnik v which was developed by russia's gamaleya national research institute of epidemiology and microbiology, has since been successfully registered in 68 countries across north and south america, the middle east, europe, asia and africa.
it said following its unit, duopharma (m) sdn bhd's (dmsb) recent signing with the malaysian government, represented by the health ministry, concluded execution of separate definitive supply agreements with the government and rdif.
this follows the jan 26 announcement of the signing by dmsb of separate term sheets with the government and rdif.
duopharma biotech also said three of the countries that have registered sputnik v hungary, slovakia and argentina are members of the european pharmaceutical inspection co-operation scheme.
based on peer reviewed results of the second interim analysis phase iii published by one of the world's oldest and most respected medical journals, the lancet, sputnik v's efficacy has been confirmed at 91.
6%.
furthermore, it is one of only three vaccines in the world with an efficacy rating of over 90%, and no serious adverse events related to the vaccine were recorded.
according to rdif, 20 million people have so far received the vaccine globally with emergency use authorisation (eua) registered in 64 countries.
in addition to providing full protection against severe cases of covid-19, sputnik v is the world's first registered vaccine based on a well-studied human adenoviral vector-based platform.
the safety, efficacy and lack of negative long-term effects of adenoviral vector-based vaccines have been proven by more than 250 clinical studies over two decades.
duopharma biotech group managing director, leonard ariff abdul shatar confirmed the company's state of readiness and commented:"the covid-19 pandemic has presented all malaysians with extraordinary challenges, which we can only overcome through immediate collaboration on many fronts: duopharma biotech is fully committed and proud to be part of our nation's inoculation programme," leonard ariff said.
tags / keywords:
duopharma biotech
                                                                ,
                                                                                                supply agreements
                                                                ,
                                                                                                russian direct investment fund
                                                                ,
                                                                                                sputnik v vaccine
                                                                ,
                                                                                                leonard ariff abdul shatar

topic:



report it to us.
thank you for your report!copyright © 1995-
            

 star media group berhad (10894d)best viewed on chrome browsers.
{{item['v1 header']}}
   {{item['v1 body']}}

  {{item['v2 header']}}

are you having urinary troubles?
by taking the survey, it is deemed that you consent to the termswe hope you enjoy this feature!
singapore: singapore reported 15 new covid-19 community cases as of noon on tuesday (jun 1), including seven with no links to previous cases.
eight were linked to previous cases, with six already on quarantine and two detected through surveillance, said the ministry of health (moh).
there were also three imported cases, who had been placed on stay-home notice upon arrival in singapore.
no new infections were reported in migrant workers' dormitories.
in all, singapore reported 18 new covid-19 cases on tuesday.
closure of hua zai outletsmoh said it is investigating cases of covid-19 infection among individuals who work athua zai outletsas epidemiological investigations have found that there is "likely ongoing transmission".
the hua zai outlet in ntuc foodfare (308 anchorvale road) has been closed since may 30, following the detection of cases linked to the coffee shop.
to break any potential chain of transmission and enable deep cleaning of the premises, moh said all 26 hua zai outlets will be closed to the public for two weeks from jun 1.  they will reopen on jun 15.
7 unlinked casesa 37-year-old singaporean who is a resident at mindsville@napiri is among the seven unlinked cases.
the woman developed a runny nose and cough on may 29 and subsequently a fever on may 30.  she was taken to a polyclinic the next day, where she underwent both an antigen rapid test (art) and polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test.
both tests came back positive for covid-19 infection on may 31 and her serology test result is pending.
the other cases include a 46-year-old singaporean who works as a front desk staff member at hotel boss and a 29-year-old malaysian who works as a car park roving officer at top parking.
both had developed symptoms such as fever and body aches prior to testing positive for covid-19.
there is also a 26-year-old malaysian who works as a delivery rider for pizza hut (hougang green) and a 72-year-old singaporean who is employed by smn elite security as a security guard at shriro house (11 chang charn road).
the remaining two cases are a 56-year-old singaporean homemaker and an 82-year-old singaporean retiree.
all of the other unlinked cases experienced symptoms such as fever, body aches, shortness of breath or loss of taste prior to testing positive for covid-19.
hong ye group cleaners cluster growsa 17-year-old singaporean who works at ang mo kio-thye hua kwan hospital has been linked to the hong ye group cleaners cluster, which now has a total of 22 infections.
the teenager, known was case 63929, last went to work on may 28.  she is a close contact of a previously confirmed case, an 18-year-old singaporean who is a full-time national serviceman at the civil defence academy.
case 63929 developed a fever and sore throat on may 30 but did not seek medical treatment until may 31 when she visited a clinic and was tested for covid-19.
her test result came back positive for covid-19 infection on the same day and her serology test result is pending.
new clustersthree new clusters have been identified.
two new cases reported on tuesday have been linked to the case 63887 cluster, which now has three infections.
case 63887, a 65-year-old singaporean who is a homemaker, was confirmed to have covid-19 on may 30. among the two new cases is a four-year-old singaporean student at my first skool at block 332b anchorvale link.
the girl was last in school on may 12.  she developed a cough and a fever on may 26 and may 27 respectively, and sought medical treatment at a clinic on may 28. as she had been identified as a close contact of case 63887, she was quarantined on may 30 and was tested for covid-19 on the same day.
her test result came back positive for covid-19 on may 31 and her serology test result is pending.
the other case linked to the case 63887 is a 27-year-old malaysian homemaker.
she developed a fever and cough during quarantine and tested positive for covid-19 on may 31. the second new cluster is linked to case 63399, a 35-year-old malaysian who is a kitchen crew member at kota zheng zong bak kut teh (serangoon gardens).
the new case in this cluster is a 29-year-old malaysian who works as a waitress at chir chir restaurant at bugis junction.
this brings the total number of cases in this cluster to three.
the third new cluster is linked to case 63743, a 24-year-old malaysian who works at mcdonald's (the woodgrove).
the new case in this cluster is a 28-year-old malaysian who works as a waiter at acid bar.
this brings the total number of cases in this cluster to three.
2-year-old among community casesa two-year-old singaporean who is a student at carpe diem at 2 ang mo kio drive has been added to the cluster linked to a 31-year-old singaporean man who works as a property agent with era realty network.
the cluster has now grown to seven cases.
the girl is a family member of three previously confirmed covid-19 cases and was last in school on may 14.  she was quarantined on may 24 and tested negative for covid-19 on may 30. she was asymptomatic and was detected when she was tested again on may 31 during quarantine.
her serology test result is positive.
a 39-year-old singaporean homemaker has been linked to the tektronix cluster.
she is a family member and household contact of a previously confirmed case.
the woman was quarantined on may 25.  she was tested for covid-19 on may 26 and her result came back negative on the same day.
she then developed a fever on may 31 and was again tested for covid-19.
her result came back positive on the same day and her serology test result is pending.
the remaining linked case is a 30-year-old singaporean man who works as a technician at st engineering innosparks.
he is a family member and household contact of a previously confirmed case.
the man developed a fever and cough on may 30 and sought medical treatment at a polyclinic the next day, where he underwent both an art and pcr test.
he was immediately isolated when his art came back positive.
his pcr test result also came back positive for covid-19 on the same day while his serology test result is negative.
imported casestwo of the imported cases are singaporeans who returned from india and the philippines.
the remaining imported case is a short-term visit pass holder who arrived from the philippines for a work project in singapore.
moh said the short-term visit pass holder, a 38-year-old filipino man, had arrived on apr 23 and served his stay-home notice at a dedicated facility until may 7. his pre-departure test taken in the philippines on apr 22, his on-arrival test in singapore on apr 23, as well as his swab done on may 6 during stay-home notice, were negative for covid-19.
he is asymptomatic, and was detected when he was tested for covid-19 on may 29, with his test result coming back positive the next day.
"his ct value was very high, which is indicative of a low viral load, and his serology test result has also come back positive," said moh.
"given that these indicate likely past infection, we have classified the case as imported based on his travel history.
he is likely to be shedding minute fragments of the virus rna, which are no longer transmissible and infective to others.
"number of active cases in intensive care unit or requiring oxygen supplementation.
(image: ministry of health)22 more patients dischargedmoh said the overall number of new cases in the community has decreased from 176 cases in the week before to 125 cases in the past week.
the number of unlinked cases in the community has also decreased from 30 cases in the week before to 27 cases in the past week.
among the 179 cases reported from may 26 to jun 1, 49 cases have tested positive for their serology tests while 112 have tested negative.
another 18 serology test results are pending.
twenty-two more cases have been discharged from hospitals or community isolation facilities, bringing singapore's total recoveries to 61,481. there are 217 cases still in hospital.
most of them are stable or improving, and two are in critical condition in the intensive care unit.
another 338 are being isolated and cared for at community facilities.
as of tuesday, singapore has reported a total of 62,069 covid-19 cases and 33 fatalities.
​​​​​​​mandatory covid-19 tests began for residents of three housing blocks in yishun and hougang on tuesday.
residents ofblock 745 yishun street 72were being tested after moh said on monday that there was "likely covid-19 transmission" in the block.
residents ofblocks 501 and 507 hougang avenue 8were also set to undergo the mandatory covid-19 tests, after traces of the virus were found in wastewater samples taken from those blocks.
moh said no confirmed cases had yet to be identified in the blocks.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
jerusalem: prime minister benjamin netanyahu's party on tuesday challenged the legality of a bid by a rival rightist to head a new israeli government, but the last-gasp attempt at extending his leadership was rejected by president reuven rivlin.
naftali bennett, netanyahu's former defence minister, announced on sunday (may 31) he would join a proposed alliance with centrist opposition leader yair lapid, serving as its premier first under a rotation deal.
they have until wednesday midnight (2200 gmt) to present a final pact to rivlin, who handed lapid the task of forming a new government after netanyahu failed to do so in the wake of a close election on mar 23. in a letter to the legal counsels of the presidency and parliament, netanyahu's conservative likud said lapid was not authorised to cede the premiership to bennett.
but rivlin's office said in response that there was no legal merit to likud's claim because lapid would be sworn in as "alternate prime minister", second to serve as premier as part of the rotation.
it accepted likud's argument that lapid must provide the president with full details of the new government and not just announce that he has clinched a coalition deal.
the lapid-bennett power-share may include other rightist politicians as well as liberal and centre-left parties.
israeli media have speculated it could also court parliamentary backing from a party that draws votes from israel's arab minority.
that has prompted netanyahu to accuse bennett of imperiling israel as it contends with internal jewish-arab strife over last month's gaza conflict, the moribund peace process with the palestinians, and iran.
netanyahu, 71, is the dominant political figure of his generation.
he was first elected prime minister in 1996 and he returned to power in 2009, holding the top office for more than a decade.
but he also faces a corruption trial for bribery, fraud and breach of trust charges he denies.
divided countrya photo-shopped picture of bennett in an arab headdress, circulated on social media, prompted comparisons with attempts to discredit former prime minister yitzhak rabin, assassinated in 1995 by an ultranationalist opposed to his peacemaking.
lapid said on monday that both he and bennett had been given extra security following threats to their safety.
both have said they want to bring together israelis from across the political divide and end hateful political discourse.
"a country that is divided and violent won't be able to deal with iran or with the economy.
a leadership that incites us against one another harms our ability to deal with the challenges we face," lapid said.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
yangon (bloomberg) myanmar's junta has moved the nation's civilian leader aung san suu kyi and former president win myint from their residences in the capital to an "unknown location", according to allies who have expressed serious concerns for their safety.
the two have been held by the country's powerful military since it seized power in a coup on feb 1.
"we've heard from reliable sources that president win myint and state counsellor aung san suu kyi have been moved to another unknown location," the shadow government formed by ms suu kyi's national league for democracy party and allies, also known as the national unity government, said in a statement on monday (may 31).
ms suu kyi, who once defended the military's brutal crackdown on rohingya minorities at the international court of justice, is facing six criminal charges including violating state secrets and incitement.
mr win myint is also charged with incitement and breaching covid-19 restrictions.
the head of the legal defence team for both leaders, mr khin maung zaw, said ms suu kyi had told lawyers during a meeting before her court appearance on may 24 that she had been moved one night earlier to an unfamiliar location.
"after the court hearing, we lawyers have no contact with her at all," he said.
"she's a much-loved leader of our state so we have been extremely concerned about her safety since day one and such concerns are still there.
"labelling the regime a "terrorist military council", the national unity government reiterated its efforts to ensure accountability and justice and urged the junta to take responsibility for its actions after the coup and against ethnic nationalities.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore — covid-19 vaccination guidelines in singapore have been eased for pregnant women, breastfeeding women, cancer patients currently receiving treatment, and persons who have previously suffered severe skin allergy reactions to medications.
the expert committee on covid-19 vaccination (ec19v) has been monitoring evidence and developments around the world and has revised its guidelines accordingly, the multi-ministry taskforce (mtf) on the pandemic said at a virtual press briefing on monday (31 may).
there was no evidence to suggest that the pfizer-biontech or moderna covid-19 vaccines may cause harm to pregnant women or their babies, the mtf stated.
however, the committee noted that the amount of data collected on the population segment was still much smaller compared to data on the general population.
it advised pregnant women to discuss the risks and benefits with their doctors to make an informed decision on the vaccination.
pregnant women will be able to register and book a vaccination appointment from 4 june, if they are part of the population group eligible for vaccination.
similarly, the two vaccines have been deemed to be safe for breastfeeding women and there is no need to stop breastfeeding while receiving the jabs, the ec19v said.
cancer patients on active cancer treatment remain at an increased risk of complications from covid-19 but there was no evidence of any safety signals or increased rates of adverse events from mrna-based covid-19 vaccines, noted the authorities.
director of medical services kenneth mak noted that moh had previously exercised "considerable caution" and advised that these patients complete their treatment before getting vaccinated.
"at this time, we prefer for these patients to be vaccinated in a hospital setting where they can be better monitored for their health status.
and we will review later whether these conditions can be revised.
"persons with severe cutaneous adverse reactions (scar), or sever skin allergy reactions to medications, can also receive both vaccines, even though they were previously not recommended to do so.
scar includes stevens-johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms, and drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome.
"these are very severe reactions that occur as a result of taking various types of medications," explained prof mak.
"and if you have previously had such a severe allergic reaction to medications like antibiotics, you will now be eligible to receive your covid-19 vaccination.
"the ec19v is also reviewing safety data on persons with a history of anaphylaxis, to allow more to be safely vaccinated, it added.
the committee said it intends to complete the review in the next two weeks, and will set out guidelines allowing certain persons who have had previous history of anaphylaxis to be vaccinated using mrna vaccines safely.
prof mak said, "we hope that these adjustments to our guidance will offer vaccination opportunities for more people and allow them to benefit from the enhanced immune protection that vaccination offers.
"stay in the know on-the-go: join yahoo singapore's telegram channel at http://t.
me/yahoosingaporerelated stories:possible easing of covid restrictions after 13 june if community cases fall further: lee hsien loongsingapore to make over-the-counter diy covid-19 tests available to residentscovid-19: vaccination bookings for singapore students to begin from 1 june400,000 students in singapore can register for covid vaccine from 1 june'very unlikely' to resume phase 3 straight after 13 june: lawrence wongsingapore to allow alternative covid-19 vaccines for use by private sectorhousehold members of close contact of covid-19 case to be isolated immediately: pm leehousehold contacts of quarantined persons must self-isolate at home: mohmalaysia's air force scrambled jets to intercept 16 chinese military aircraft off the country's coast in the south china sea, a rare incident officials said tuesday threatened "national sovereignty".
the us military will hand over its main bagram air base to afghan forces in about 20 days, an official said tuesday, as washington presses on with withdrawing the last of its troops from the country.
《!》ut,!china on tuesday denied an australian academic's claims that he had been tortured in custody during his two-year detention on espionage charges.
if you've got a citibank credit card, you're in luck.
here are the deals you can enjoy as a citibank credit cardmember (on top of the credit card's own perks).
a well-known global bank, citibank offers some of the best credit cards in singapore.
it [.
.
. ]
the post citibank credit card promotions and deals: june 2021 appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
the employers of an american journalist detained by myanmar authorities said monday they were yet to receive any information on his whereabouts or wellbeing, a week after he was detained.
「」:$50,1,!the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
one: full blast might've been a quick replacement for one: empower, but the martial arts spectacle delivered plenty of exciting action.
the show, which aired on friday, 28 may, featured a one super series muay thai main event between a pair of top contenders and a flyweight co-main event between rising stars.
in the evening's final .
.
.
continue reading "saemapetch kos kulabdam, xie tkos agasa at one: full blast"fifteen tutoring firms have been hammered with millions of dollars of fines over alleged fraud, chinese state media said tuesday, as the government's chastening of the tech sector seeps into the private education businesses.
drp, ,26,. drp:$4500 $10000.
israeli opposition leader yair lapid on monday said many obstacles remain before a diverse coalition can be built to oust veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu, but voiced hope it will achieve the "greater goal".
singapore residents will soon be able to purchase "do-it-yourself" covid-19 tests over the counter at pharmacies, said prime minister lee hsien loong on monday (31 may).
a senior australian cabinet minister on monday dropped a high-profile defamation suit against public broadcaster abc over its publication of rape allegations that helped spark nationwide protests.
smart,5%!$1,600,!he risked everything to give his baby girl a second chance at life this article, cannabis can mean death in malaysia.
for one dad, it also meant life for his daughter.
, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
china has jailed a popular blogger for "defaming martyrs" after he suggested the death toll of the china-india border clash last year was higher than the official count of four.
turkish spies snatched a nephew of a longtime foe of president recep tayyip erdogan in kenya and brought him back to turkey, media and family said on monday.
,hk$1,000!
!from the dark days of italy's 2018 world cup qualifying fiasco to the eve of the european championships, roberto mancini has transformed the fortunes of fallen footballing giants italy.
thousands of doctors across india wore black armbands on tuesday calling for the arrest of a hugely popular guru who has claimed yoga can prevent covid-19 and that conventional medicine has killed thousands of coronavirus patients.
the vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap) aims to provide singaporeans with an added layer of peace of mind when they choose to be vaccinated.
the post vaccine injury financial assistance programme (vifap): how much will moh be insuring for serious side effects related to covid-19 vaccination?
appeared first on dollarsandsense.
sg.
!china has relaxed its family planning policy to allow couples to have three children after a census showed its population is rapidly ageing, state media reported monday, further unwinding four decades of controls in the world's most populous nation which have strangled the birthrate.
how do you deal with noisy neighbours in singapore?
soundproof your home for peace of mind and better work productivity.
here's how you can.
.
.
a major us-australia joint military exercise will go ahead this year despite pandemic concerns but will be significantly scaled-back, a senior australian military officer said tuesday.
,
        
(yong lin foundation photo) 
(yong lin foundation photo) 

            taipei (taiwan news) — foxconn technology group founder terry gou () on monday (may 31) indicated that he is pushing forward with his attempt to acquire 5 million doses of the pfizer-biontech covid-19 vaccine directly from germany, with the total cost estimated to be nt$6.
3 billion (us$228 million).
in his latest update on his progress, gou wrote on facebook that "everyone is continuing to work hard.
let's go, everybody!"
the previous evening, gou wrote that his yong lin foundation () is aware of taiwanese concerns about the vaccine and called on the public to rest assured that "we will strive for the delivery," with the goal of completing the application within 72 hours.
udn cited yong lin foundation director amanda liu () as saying monday that according to the authorities, documents for eight criteria set by the central epidemic command center (cecc) must be submitted in order to begin the process of acquiring vaccines.
liu said there are many steps involved in confirming the feasibility of the eight criteria.
she said that guo has given her team 72 hours to complete all the related work.
the deadline is wednesday (june 2), and her team is working hard to submit the application to competent authorities by that time, according to liu.
when hong kong purchased the vaccine from biontech, the cost was us$30 per dose.
for 5 million doses, this would come out to us$150 million.
however, this does not include the cost of transportation, cold chain logistics, storage, inspection, labeling, distribution, and administration.
once all of these are factored in, gou would find himself having to shell out at least us$228 million.
beyond the documentation required, the manufacturer must also coordinate directly with the government on transportation, storage, and other details that must be confirmed and prepared.
only after the eight required documents have been completed in full will the government consider the vaccine purchase application
            in another facebook post, gou said he would entrust the manufacturer with applying with the government and emphasized that he would be applying for 5 million doses of the "german bnt vaccine. "
he said that if the application is approved, the doses "will be shipped directly from germany to taiwan by air. "
gou pledged that he would not consider introducing vaccines made in china.
he then called on the public to "not confuse the german-made bnt with chinese-made vaccines. "
however, gou did not address the fact that in march of last year, shanghai-based fosun international signed a deal with biontech that gave it exclusive rights to sell the vaccine in the "greater china" market, which includes taiwan.
it is unclear how any taiwanese government agency or organization would be able to bypass this agreement.
regarding applications from various organizations, health minister and cecc head chen shih-chung () on monday said that the food and drug administration has received four applications to purchase vaccines, while the cecc has received two.
however, he said none of these organizations have included all the required documentation.
updated : 2021-06-01 23:57 gmt+08:00taiwan news  ©  2019 all rights reserved.
singapore: singapore reported 16 new covid-19 cases in the community as of noon on monday (may 31), including three with no links to previous infections.
thirteen were linked to previous cases, with 11 already on quarantine and two detected through surveillance, said the ministry of health (moh).
there were also seven imported cases, all of whom were placed on stay-home notice upon arrival in singapore.
one singaporean and three permanent residents who returned from india, indonesia, malaysia and the philippines are among the imported cases.
another three are work permit holders who arrived from indonesia and myanmar, of whom one is a foreign domestic worker.
no new infections were reported in migrant workers' dormitories.
in all, singapore reported 23 new covid-19 cases on monday.
white sands primary school employee among unlinked casesa 60-year-old singaporean is among the three unlinked infections.
the woman, who is fully vaccinated, works in an administrative role at white sands primary school.
she developed a fever, cough and runny nose on may 28 and sought treatment at a general practitioner clinic on may 30.  she underwent both an antigen rapid test (art) and polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test, and both test results came back positive for covid-19 infection on the same day.
her serology test result is pending.
the other two cases are a 68-year-old singaporean who works as a manager at phoenix entertainment karaoke tv music lounge and a 72-year-old singaporean homemaker.
both experienced symptoms such as headache and cough prior to testing positive for covid-19.
hong ye group cleaners clusterfour more cases have been linked to the hong ye group cleaners cluster, which now has a total of 21 infections.
there is an 11-year-old singaporean who is a student at new town primary school.
he was last in school on may 18 and developed a fever on may 20 but did not seek medical attention.
the boy subsequently developed a fever, diarrhea and vomiting on may 26 and sought medical treatment at a general practitioner clinic the next day, where he was diagnosed with stomach flu and was therefore not tested for covid-19.
he was later identified as a household contact of five covid-19 cases, and placed on quarantined on may 28.  he was tested for covid-19 on may 30 and his result came back positive on the same day while his serology test result is pending.
the second case is an 18-year-old singaporean who is employed by hong ye group as a cleaner at changi business park.
as he had been identified as a contact of a previously confirmed case another hong ye group cleaner who also worked at changi business park he was placed on phone surveillance on may 27. on the same day, he developed a cough and runny nose but did not report his symptoms or seek medical attention.
he developed a loss of taste and smell on may 29 and sought medical treatment at a clinic on the same day, where he underwent both an art and pcr test.
moh said he was immediately isolated when his art result came back positive the same day.
his pcr test result came back positive for covid-19 infection on may 30 and his serology test result is negative.
the other cases include an 18-year-old singaporean who is a full-time national serviceman at the civil defence academy.
he is a family member and household contact of three other confirmed covid-19 cases and was quarantined on may 28. the fully vaccinated teenager was tested for covid-19 on may 30 during quarantine and developed a sore throat on the same day.
his test result came back positive for covid-19 infection on may 30 and his serology test result is pending.
the remaining case is a 16-year-old singaporean who is currently unemployed.
he is also a household contact of five other covid-19 cases and was quarantined on may 28.  he developed a cough and sore throat on the same day but did not report his symptoms.
he was tested for covid-19 on may 30 during quarantine and his test result came back positive for covid-19 infection on the same day.
his serology test result is pending.
ntuc foodfare clustertwo more cases have been linked to the ntuc foodfare cluster, which now has a total of nine infections in total.
one of the new cases is a 33-year-old permanent resident who had already been quarantined.
he works as a supervisor at hua zai hk style roasted delight rice noodle and is a household contact of five previously confirmed cases.
the other new case is a 33-year-old malaysian who works as a kitchen assistant at hua zai hk style roasted delights at 308 achorvale road and 476d upper serangoon view.
he developed a cough and runny nose on may 30 and sought medical treatment at a clinic where he underwent both an art and pcr test.
he was immediately isolated when his art result came back positive on the same day.
his pcr test result came back positive for covid-19 on may 30 and his serology test result is negative.
new clustera new cluster has been identified, linked to a 49-year-old singaporean who works as an executive at eng soon chair & table hire service.
the woman, known as case 63844, was confirmed to have covid-19 on may 28. two new cases reported on monday have been linked to the woman, bringing the total number of infections in this cluster to three.
the latest cases are an 82-year-old singaporean retiree and a 54-year-old singaporean who works as a senior executive at eng soon chair & table hire service.
both of them are the family members of case 63844.
3 existing clusters growmore cases have been linked to three existing clusters.
a 33-year-old singaporean who works as a manager at changi airport group has been linked to a 31-year-old singaporean who works as a property agent with era realty.
the cluster now has six infections.
two new cases are linked to cluster involving a 15-year-old student at westwood secondary school.
one of the new cases is a nine-year-old singaporean student from chua chu kang primary school who also attends student care at happy star learning hub student care & tuition centre.
the other case is a 45-year-old singaporean homemaker.
both cases are family members and household contacts of previously confirmed covid-19 cases and were asymptomatic.
the cluster now has a total of six infections.
another community case reported on monday is linked to a third cluster involving a previously confirmed case, a 74-year-old singaporean retiree.
a 56-year-old singaporean homemaker has been linked to him, bringing the total number of infections in this cluster to four.
the woman tested positive for covid-19 on may 30 during quarantine and subsequently developed a cough that evening.
moh said her serology test result is negative for the n antigen, which suggests the presence of early infection.
the woman received her first dose of the covid-19 vaccine on apr 27. malaysian admin worker among linked casesthe remaining linked covid-19 community case is a 30-year-old malaysian administrative employee at sin wei precision mechanical.
he is a household contact of a previously confirmed case – a 35-year-old malaysian who worked at kota zheng zong bak kut teh (serangoon gardens) – and was quarantined on may 17. he was tested for covid-19 on may 22 and his test result was negative.
he developed a fever and cough on may 27 but did not report his symptoms until may 30, said moh.
the man was then tested for covid-19 and his test result came back positive on the same day.
his serology test result is negative.
decrease in new community casesoverall the number of new cases in the community has decreased from 185 cases in the week before to 128 cases in the past week.
the number of unlinked cases in the community has also decreased from 32 cases in the week before to 26 cases in the past week.
among the 191 cases reported from may 25 to may 31, 45 cases have tested positive for their serology tests while 110 have tested negative.
another 36 serology test results are pending.
moh said 25 more cases have been discharged from hospitals or community isolation facilities, bringing singapore's total recoveries to 61,459. there are 223 cases still in hospital.
most of them are stable or improving, and two are in critical condition in the intensive care unit.
another 336 are isolated and cared for at community facilities.
as of monday, singapore has reported a total of 62,051 covid-19 cases and 33 fatalities from the disease.
singapore "on track" to bringing covid-19 outbreak under controlprime minister lee hsien loong said singapore "should be on track" tobringing its covid-19 outbreak under control, barring any super-spreader events or large clusters.
if the number of community cases falls further, the country "should be" able to relaxexisting restrictionsunder the phase 2 (heightened alert) period after jun 13, the date that they are currently set to last until, mr lee said in anaddress to the nationon monday.
mr lee also announced plans tomake covid-19 testing part of the new normal, as well as theacceleration of the national vaccination programme, withvaccination bookings for studentsto open on jun 1. the elderly were also urged to come forward for their vaccination.
nearly three quarters of the elderly – 760,000 senior citizens aged 60 and above – have had at least one jab or booked a slot already, but 280,000 have still not yet booked appointments, mr lee said.
those above 60 can now walk into any vaccination centre and get vaccinated on the spot with no need to register or book in advance.
those who are immobile can also be jabbed during home visits by medical professionals, he added.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
food giant nestle announced monday that it is seeking to develop a new health strategy after an internal document made headlines around the globe as it showed that almost two-thirds of its products lack nutrition.
an internal presentation circulated among top executives earlier this year revealed that more than 60% of nestle's mainstream food and drinks portfolio did not meet the "recognized definition of health," the financial times (ft) reported.
the presentation, seen by the ft, revealed that only 37% of nestle's food and beverages by revenues (not including products like pet food, baby food and specialized medical nutrition) achieved a rating of over 3.
5 under australia's five-star health rating system.
among drinks except for plain coffee were found to be 96% "unhealthy" and candy and ice cream to be 99%.
nestle, the owner of everything from chocolate to coffee and baby food brands, has for several years been reorganizing its activities to focus more on health and wellness as consumers increasingly snub frozen pizzas and sugary drinks.
the swiss company has among other things been making a major push in vegetarian and vegan products.
"we have made significant improvements to our products," the nestle presentation said, according to the ft. but, it added, "our portfolio still underperforms against external definitions of health in a landscape where regulatory pressure and consumer demands are skyrocketing.
"a nestle spokesperson told agence france-presse (afp) the company was currently "working on a company-wide project to update its pioneering nutrition and health strategy.
""we are looking at our entire portfolio across the different phases of people's lives to ensure our products are helping meet their nutritional needs and supporting a balanced diet," she saidthe initial focus, she added, would be on "assessing the part (of) our food and beverage portfolio that can be measured against external nutrition profiling systems," like the australian system.
according to the ft, nestle is aiming to unveil its new strategy this year.
quoting an unnamed person familiar with the situation, the paper suggested the company might drop products pushing down its health ratings such as confectionery items.
please
                     click 
                    to read our informative text prepared pursuant to the law on the protection of personal data no.
6698 and to get information about the
                    cookies
                    used on our website in accordance with the relevant legislation.
6698 sayılı kişisel verilerin korunması kanunu uyarınca hazırlanmış aydınlatma metnimizi okumak ve sitemizde ilgili mevzuata uygun olarak kullanılan
                    çerezlerle
                    ilgili bilgi almak için lütfen
                    tıklayınız.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
bangalore the fire aboard a singapore-registered container vessel off colombo port was finally extinguished on tuesday (june 1), after causing extensive marine pollution in sri lanka's waters.
with the blaze finally put out after 12 days, the authorities said they were turning their attention to probing the cause of the fire and placing accountability for it.
the x-press pearl is operated by the singapore-based x-press feeders.
flying a singapore flag, the ship was carrying 1,486 containers and had 25 tonnes of nitric acid, other chemicals and cosmetics on board.
it was on its way to singapore from the port of hazira in india, via colombo, when the fire broke out.
the company now faces criminal charges under sri lanka's marine pollution prevention act of 2008, and civil claims will be made subsequently as penalty for the pollution damage caused.
"from the very first day, we have been collecting data regarding the ship and the pollution.
after we settled the immediate issue of the fire and the safety of the crew, it is high time we take legal action," dr p.  b.  terney pradeep kumara, general manager of sri lanka's marine environment protection authority (mepa), told the straits times.
mepa has lodged a complaint with the harbour police in colombo.
a police spokesman said the police will start taking statements from the ship's captain and crew, now that they are out of quarantine, which was required under covid-19 protocols.
x-press feeders said in a may 31 statement that "select seafarers have been helping local police with their enquiries into the fire and are cooperating with investigators.
we will respect this process and not publicly discuss operational details until the investigation has been completed".
while the criminal investigation is ongoing, a damage assessment team from mepa is doing "a scientific cost assessment" of the destruction caused to marine resources and the coast, said dr kumara.
"we are focused on the ship not informing (the authorities about) the possible pollution, and compiling reports on the pollution they have caused.
normally, the ship captain is culpable," he added.
since the ship burst into flames 12 days ago, there have been fears of an oil spill and chemical leaks from the containers.
"at the moment, the fire is under control and there is no sign of an oil spill," said mr dan malika gunasekera, a maritime lawyer in sri lanka and former executive director of the ceylon shipping corporation.
he added that indian and dutch fire-fighting teams were working to cool the vessel down and take out the bunker oil.
but the chemical dispersants used to douse the fire and toxic chemicals in the containers have already affected the sea and coast.
the chemical dispersants used to douse the fire and toxic chemicals in the containers have already affected the sea and coast.
photo: epa-efe
dr kumara said: "the underwater area is still inaccessible because of the ship's condition and the water is also turbid there.
"the extent of the damage is still difficult to estimate.
"it will take some months to fully assess it," he added.
tiny plastic pellets called nurdles, used in plastics manufacturing, have also spilled from the burning ship and spread along sri lanka's western coastline.
this kind of waste is challenging to clean up and dangerous to fish as it blocks their airways, and will be factored into the probe.
mepa told afp that the plastic waste caused "the worst beach pollution in our history", and warned it could cause years of ecological damage.
tiny plastic pellets called nurdles, used in plastics manufacturing, have spilled from the burning ship and spread along sri lanka's western coastline.
photo: afp
apart from marine damage, the fisheries ministry is also assessing the expected losses to 4,500 fishermen and the seafood industry in negombo.
fishing has been banned in an 80km stretch of the coast where the chemicals and pellets have washed up.
after the greek oil carrier new diamond caught fire in september 2020 off the coast of sri lanka, mepa took legal action.
the sri lankan attorney-general charged the ship's captain with causing an oil spill and sought a fine of us$1 million (s$1.
3 million), which the colombo high court reduced to us$65,000.
that ship's owner, porto emporios shipping, was charged us$2.
4 million for the fire-fighting effort.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
jerusalem: israeli nationalist hardliner naftali bennett said on sunday (may 30) that he would join apotential coalition governmentthat could end the rule of the country's longest-serving leader, prime minister benjamin netanyahu.
lawmakers opposed to right-wing netanyahu have been in intense talks ahead of a wednesday deadline, as a ceasefire held following the latestdeadly military conflict with hamasin the gaza strip.
netanyahu, 71, who faces trial on fraud, bribery and breach of trust charges, which he denies, has clung to power throughout a period of political turmoil that has seen four inconclusive elections in under two years.
a march vote saw netanyahu's likud party gain the most seats, but he again failed to form a government.
opposition leader and former tv anchor yair lapid now has until wednesday evening to build a rival coalition.
lapid, 57, is seeking a diverse alliance which the israeli media has dubbed a bloc for "change", which would include bennett as well as arab-israeli lawmakers.
in his determination to bring down the hawkish prime minister, lapid has offered to share power and let bennett, 49, serve the first term in a rotating premiership.
bennett, after meeting members of his religious-nationalist yamina party, said on sunday: "i will do everything to form a national unity government with my friend yair lapid.
"lapid and bennett's parties started talks on sunday night to formalise the deal, they said in a statement.
religious-nationalist yamina won seven seats in mar 23 elections, but one member has refused to join an anti-netanyahu coalition.
netanyahu, who has been in office for 12 consecutive years after an earlier three-year term, in his own televised address minutes later lashed out at the plan, calling it "a danger for the security of israel".
"desperate position"he had earlier on sunday tried to cling to power by offering his own, last-ditch power-sharing agreement to several former allies including bennett.
he warned that israel would otherwise be ruled by a dangerous "left-wing" alliance.
lapid has until 11.
59 pm local time on wednesday (4.
59am on thursday, singapore time) to build a coalition of at least 61 deputies, a majority in the 120-seat knesset.
a lapid government would also include the centrist blue and white party of netanyahu's rival benny gantz and the hawkish new hope party of his former ally gideon saar.
avigdor lieberman's pro-settlement yisrael beitenu party as well as historically powerful labour and the dovish meretz party would also join.
the shaky arrangement would need the backing of some arab-israeli lawmakers of palestinian descent in order to pass a confirmation vote in parliament.
the intense talks follow weeks of escalating tensions between israel and the palestinians, including a deadly 11-day exchange of rocket fire from gaza and devastating israeli airstrikes.
the war with hamas that ended with a may 21 truce, as well as violence in the occupied west bank and in mixed jewish-arab towns in israel, initially appeared to leave netanyahu more likely to hold onto power.
but political scientist gayil talshir at hebrew university told afp on sunday that israel was now "closer than ever" to a coalition of change, adding: "netanyahu is in a desperate position.
"netanyahu's likud party won 30 seats in the march elections, but failed to form a governing coalition after his far-right partners refused to sit with arab factions or receive their support.
lapid, whose party won 17 seats, was then given four weeks to form a government.
netanyahu had previously pushed for yet another election israel's fifth in a little more than two years.
more elections?on sunday, netanyahu offered his own proposal of a rotation agreement with bennett and saar.
but saar on twitter said that he remained committed to "replacing the netanyahu regime".
netanyahu in a video then called on saar and bennett to "come now, immediately" to meet him and join a three-way rotation government, warning that they were in a "crucial moment for the security, character and future of the state of israel".
lapid's "change" coalition also still faced several obstacles.
some right-wing lawmakers object to a partnership with politicians from israel's arab minority, who make up about a fifth of the population.
the recent gaza conflict sparked inter-communal clashes between jewish and arab israelis in mixed cities.
arab politicians have also been divided about joining a government headed by bennett, who supports expanding israeli settlements in the occupied west bank, where palestinians hope to create a state.
even with support from an arab party, a new coalition in israel is unlikely to reverse years of israeli settlement construction or bring peace any time soon with hamas in gaza.
if the anti-netanyahu camp does not manage to form a government on time, a majority of 61 lawmakers could vote to ask the president to name a new premier.
another scenario would see the country return, yet again, to the polls.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore customers of consumer electronics retailer audio house may have had their personal details, such as names and contact numbers, stolen by a hacking group that had allegedly hacked furniture retailer vhive.
audio house told customers in an e-mail that it was alerted on monday (may 31) that hacking group altdos might have gained unauthorised entry into its servers.
the group claimed to have accessed the retailer's membership database, stolen information from it and used the data to blackmail audio house, the retailer added.
the company is now working with the police and other authorities, as well as a team of web experts, to ascertain if its servers had been breached and to what extent.
the police confirmed a report was lodged and they are investigating the matter.
audio house told the straits times that its database contains information of about 180,000 customers, adding that altdos had threatened the company through e-mails, which it has not responded to.
it said altdos had used fear tactics to pressure the company to pay it, as well as use audio house as a case study to blackmail other firms in future.
in previous hacking incidents, altdos, operating mainly in south-east asia, had stolen customer data from companies, blackmailed the compromised firm, leaked the data online when their demands were not met, and publicised the breaches.
in the audio house breach, the data that could have been stolen included members' names, e-mail addresses, home delivery addresses, contact numbers, credits with the company, and members' past sales transaction records.
audio house said all customer payment details and credit card information are handled by a third party payment gateway, so no credit card information was stored or possibly breached.
"all our members' ecashback and credits are safely stored with us, and you will still be able to use them in your purchases with us," the firm said.
the retailer added it had strengthened its firewall and the system's security after the incident, and had suspended its website temporarily to conduct more tests and the firewall upgrade.
apologising for the potential breach, audio house advised customers who receive any spam e-mails from altdos not to respond to it.
the company also urged customers not to spread unverified information about the incident that could bolster the hacking group's efforts.
those who need help can contact audio house.
altdos had previously claimed responsibility for hacking vhive.
the furniture retailer had said its server was hacked on march 23. compromised information included customers' names, physical and e-mail addresses and mobile numbers, but did not include identification numbers or financial information, said the furniture retailer.
in an e-mail to affected customers in early april, altdos said it managed to hack into vhive three times in nine days and claimed to have stolen information related to more than 300,000 customers and nearly 600,000 transaction records.
the group said it would leak 20,000 customer records daily, until its demands to vhive's management were met.
cyber-security experts had previously said personal details stolen by hackers could be used by cyber criminals to, among other things, send victims personalised phishing e-mails that would allow them to steal passwords or drop ransomware to lock up digital files until the crooks are paid.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore more than half of 52,000 parents or students who received smses to sign up for covid-19 vaccination have booked their slots as at 7pm on tuesday (june 1), said the ministry of education (moe).
the messages have been sent to invite students taking the o-, n- and a-level examinations or equivalent qualifications this year to sign up for vaccination.
"vaccination for students in schools and institutes of higher learning is part of the larger national efforts to keep our education institutions and the wider community safe," moe told the straits times.
"all medically eligible individuals are encouraged to get vaccinated when vaccination is offered to them.
"the authorities had announced on monday that students aged 12 and above would be next in line for the national vaccination drive, and can start booking appointments for their covid-19 vaccinations from tuesday.
smses will be sent to students aged 18 and above, and to parents of children below 18. the move to vaccinate more than 400,000 students in schools and institutes of higher learning, including autonomous universities, polytechnics and the institute of technical education, comes amid more infections among children in the recent covid-19 outbreak.
currently, the pfizer-biontech vaccine is the only covid-19 vaccine that has been authorised for use in adolescents aged 12 to 17 in singapore.
those aged 18 and above can opt for either the pfizer or moderna vaccine.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
a fire onboard a cargo vessel off sri lanka's coast continued to rage for the 11th straight day on tuesday, causing what could be the region's worst marine pollution in history.
(photo: reuters)the fire on mv x-press pearl, a singapore-registered ship which is anchored near the colombo beach, broke out on may 20 and intensified four days later after an explosion.
(photo: pib/pti)  according to news agency pti, the vessel, carrying chemicals and raw materials for cosmetics, had travelled from gujarat's hazira port to the port of colombo.
(photo: reuters)a navy officer patrols the coast where remains of the vessel have washed ashore.
(photo: reuters)the ship had over 300 metric tonnes of fuel in its tanks, and was loaded with 1,486 containers carrying about 25 tonnes of hazardous nitric acid.
the blaze has reportedly destroyed most of the cargo on board.
(photo: reuters)according to al jazeera, sri lankan authorities have launched investigations to determine the cause of the fire.
(photo: pti)villagers search for cargo that has washed up on the beach.
the blaze has caused ecological damage with microplastics and fuel spilling into the indian ocean, the guardian reported.
(photo: reuters)the sri lankan navy and the indian coast guard (icg) have been working to douse the flames.
five fire-fighting tugboats are being aided by a sri lankan navy ship.
meanwhile, india has deployed two ships and an icg aircraft.
(photo: pti)  despite ongoing relief efforts, the vessel is likely to sink and cause damage to the surrounding areas and marine life.
(photo: reuters)sri lankan navy members clad in protective suits collect debris and remains from the charred vessel.
(photo: reuters)
paris: despite facing expulsion from the french open over a controversial media boycott, naomi osaka and her closest allies remained defiant monday (may 31) with no sign of a resolution to what is becoming a bitter power struggle within the sport.
the japanese star has already been fined $15,000 for not honouring media commitments following her opening round win at roland garros on sunday.
all four grand slams the french, australian and us opens as well as wimbledon closed ranks to threaten her with potential suspension from future majors if she does not relent.
there is little indication that the 23-year-old, who claims press conferences are damaging for her mental health, intends to back down.
"anger is a lack of understanding.
change makes people uncomfortable," she tweeted after hearing of her sanction.
wim fissette, the belgian coach of the 23-year-old, said osaka is "concerned with fundamental issues she wants to bring about change".
"naomi has the opportunity to use her status to address problems and to initiate things," fissette told german magazine der spiegel on monday.
"in the united states, athletes want more freedom in dealing with the press, so they are simply not threatened right away with punishment if they don't feel well for a day.
"the crisis, which could come to a head on wednesday when osaka plays her second round match, has sparked feverish reaction.
osaka's sister, mari, wrote on reddit: "naomi mentioned to me before the tournament that a family member had come up to her and remarked that she's bad on clay.
"at every press conference she's told she has a bad record on clay.
"not ok mentally""when she lost in rome, she was not ok mentally.
she was completely shattered and i think everyone's remarks and opinions have gotten to her head and she herself believed that she was bad on clay.
"mari, a former tour player, later posted a follow-up message after herself receiving criticism for the wording of her original statement.
"my message has gone horribly wrong with people struggling for mental health.
i hadn't realised that naomi had a lot of shit to deal with and was fighting very honestly for the cause of mental health.
"now people are reacting like 'she can't stand criticism'.
sorry naomi, i probably made it worse.
"us tennis legend billie jean king attempted to strike a conciliatory tone, claiming that the media, while playing a crucial role in the sport "needs to respect certain boundaries".
even the french open official website came under fire for what was perceived as a direct criticism of osaka when it tweeted photos of rafael nadal, kei nishikori, aryna sabalenka and coco gauff all smiling under the caption: 'they understood the assignment'.
former world doubles number one rennae stubbs described the post as "some serious shade".
"making a player feel guilty & humiliating her is not a good look for a tennis fed," stubbs said.
media boycotts at sports tournaments are not new.
american football star marshawn lynch, when once threatened with a heavy fine if he skipped a super bowl press briefing, responded to 20 questions from reporters by replying: "i'm just here so i won't get fined.
"grand slam tennis has witnessed a number of high-profile defaults over the years.
novak djokovic was disqualified from the us open last year for hitting a line judge with a ball.
john mcenroe was booted out of the 1990 australian open while jeff tarango was defaulted at wimbledon in 1995 after a furious rant when he accused the umpire of being "one of the most corrupt officials in the game".
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
click here to submit a story or submit it to our whatsapp.
click here to submit a story or submit it to our whatsapp.
a 75-year-old man was found dead at the foot of block 560a jurong west street 42 on sunday morning (may 30).
the police told stomp that they received a call for assistance at 9.
12am.
the elderly man was found lying motionless at the foot of the block and was pronounced dead at the scene by a paramedic.
a stomper, who spotted police vehicles at the scene, shared photos taken at 9.
30am and a video captured at 10.
15am.
the body can be seen covered by a white sheet and later by a police tent.
police investigations are ongoing.
get more of stomp's latest updates by following us on facebook, whatsapp, twitter, instagram and youtube.
view the discussion thread.
view the discussion thread.
download the new stomp app today.
sph digital news | the straits timesall rights reserved | terms & conditions | data protection policy | advertise with ussph digital news / stomp / copyright (c) 2019 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
singapore — the ministry of health (moh) on monday (31 may) confirmed the detection of 23 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,051. there are 16 new cases of locally transmitted covid-19 infection, said moh in a news release.
thirteen of these cases are linked to previous cases, out of whom 11 have already been placed on quarantine and two were detected through surveillance.
the remaining three local cases are unlinked.
all the new local cases are in the community, with no new cases detected in the migrant worker dormitories, said moh.
there are also seven imported cases, including four returning singaporeans or permanent residents.
all the imported cases have been placed on stay-home notice since their arrival in the country.
in its nightly update on sunday, moh said that a 95-year-old singaporean woman had died of complications due to covid-19 infection.
the woman, the 33rd covid-19 linked fatality in singapore, was linked to the changi airport terminal 3 cluster, which had 108 cases as of sunday.
the woman was confirmed to have covid-19 infection on 17 may when she was warded at changi general hospital for an unrelated medical condition.
she had not been vaccinated against covid-19, and had a history of cancer, hypertension and hypothyroidism.
more details to comestay in the know on-the-go: join yahoo singapore's telegram channel at http://t.
me/yahoosingaporemore singapore stories:pm lee in court in defamation suit against absent toc writersingaporean woman, 95, dies of covid-19 infection, linked to airport clustercovid: ntuc foodfare at 308 anchorvale road to close for 2 weekspm lee to speak on singapore's covid-19 plans at 4pm on mondaysri lanka launched a criminal probe on sunday into a massive container ship fire that has swamped the island nation's coast with plastic pollution in an unprecedented marine disaster.
tonnes of microplastic granules have inundated the south asian country's famed beaches, forcing a fishing ban and prompting fears of ecological damage.
the ministry of health (moh) on sunday (30 may) confirmed the detection of 25 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,028.
《!》ut,!british prime minister boris johnson married his fiancee carrie symonds in a "secret ceremony" on saturday, uk media reports said.
whilst the typical homeownership journey for most singaporeans is 'upgrading' from an hdb flat to a private property (e. g.   homeowners who need more space for their growing families might move from their smaller condo to a larger hdb flat.
on the other hand, an older couple may also choose to move into a smaller hdb flat once their children have moved out.
a 51-year-old woman recovering from a brain tumour died after consuming traditional chinese medicine (tcm) which likely caused her acute liver failure, the state coroner found.
n1   09:00-13:00   91 | n2    10:00-14:00  716the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
singapore residents will soon be able to purchase "do-it-yourself" covid-19 tests over the counter at pharmacies, said prime minister lee hsien loong on monday (31 may).
from tuesday (1 june), 400,000 students from schools and ihls can register for the covid-19 vaccine.
$6,600「」,$100「」israeli and egyptian officials held talks in both countries sunday aimed at bolstering the cairo-brokered ceasefire that ended the latest deadly flare-up of violence between the jewish state and gaza's hamas rulers.
he risked everything to give his baby girl a second chance at life this article, cannabis can mean death in malaysia.
for one dad, it also meant life for his daughter.
, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
gavin macleod, a veteran supporting actor best known for his role as an ever-smiling cruise ship captain on the 1970s-80s sitcom "the love boat," died saturday at the age of 90. citi | wharton global wealth institute,to enhance singapore's overall vaccine coverage and offer more flexibility, the government will allow private healthcare providers here to import and administer alternative covid-19 vaccines via special access routes (sars).
hdb resale flats are a great alternative for those who can't wait years for a bto.
compare hdb resale flat prices and trends in this comprehensive guide to resale flats in singapore.
israeli opposition leader yair lapid on monday said many obstacles remain before a diverse coalition can be built to oust veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu but voiced hope it will achieve the "greater goal".
polyu speed .
4,3. , .
,630. polish police said monday they were investigating a fake bomb threat that forced a ryanair passenger plane travelling from dublin to krakow to make an emergency landing in berlin.
prime minister lee hsien loong appeared in court via video conferencing on monday (31 may) in a defamation suit against a writer from the online citizen, rubaashini who was absent from the hearing.
brazil's president jair bolsonaro promised the yanomami indigenous people in remarks released sunday that there will be no mining on their land unless they want it.
here is what whole mouth dental implants should cost you in your arearesidents of a small french town laid cards and flowers saturday at the spot where a "very kind" and "gentle" policewoman was seriously wounded in a knife attack the day before, the latest in a spate of attacks on officers.
two people were killed and at least 20 wounded early sunday when three shooters fired indiscriminately into a crowd outside a concert in the miami area, police said, the latest shooting in a year that has seen a surge in both gun sales and gun violence.
hong kong police have arrested an elderly democracy activist as she made a solo demonstration over china's deadly tiananmen crackdown in a vivid illustration of the zero protest tolerance now wielded by authorities in the financial hub.
singapore: all residents of block 745 yishun street 72 will have to undergo mandatory swab tests after six covid-19 cases were detected there.
there is "likely covid-19 transmission" in the housing block, said the ministry of health (moh) on monday (may 31), adding that subsequent wastewater testing has detected covid-19 viral fragments in the block.
the need for the mandatory tests was first announced by mp faishal ibrahim (pap-nee soon) in a facebook post on monday afternoon.
"this mandatory testing is carried out when epidemiology investigations have assessed that there is likely ongoing transmission.
it is done to prevent spread in the community," said moh.
the tests will be done at the void deck of the block between 9am and 4pm, added the health ministry.
"leaflets will be distributed and sms notifications will be sent to the residents to provide them with more information," the ministry said.
"residents are also advised to monitor their health closely and consult a doctor immediately if they feel unwell.
"the six covid-19 cases at the yishun block are from two different households.
moh has identified two of them as cases 63461 and 63511 a chinese national and a malaysian respectively.
both men work at jin tai mart and are part of the jin tai tong food industries cluster.
the chinese national tested positive on may 19 and malaysian was confirmed to have covid-19 a day later.
the other four cases cases 63661, 63701, 63702 and 63703 are family members who tested positive on may 23 and 24.  they are currently linked to the cluster involving case 63660, a 31-year-old singaporean man who is a property agent with era realty network.
"epidemiological investigations are ongoing to determine linkages and the source of transmission," said moh on monday.
nee soon town council has done thorough cleaning and disinfection of the common areas at block 745 and the surrounding blocks, said dr faishal, who is also minister of state for home affairs and national development.
moh also announced on monday that residents ofblocks 501 and 507 at hougang avenue 8will undergo mandatory covid-19 testing as well.
while there are currently no confirmed cases living there, covid-19 viral fragments were detected in wastewater samples collected from those blocks.
the blocks are not far fromblock 506 hougang avenue 8where covid-19 testing was conducted for residents on may 21 and may 22 after moh said "a few" covid-19 cases were detected there.
a total of 405 residents and visitors of the block were tested, said moh on may 23. eleven covid-19 casesfrom at least four different households were identified at the block, with two of the cases picked up through mandatory testing.
separately, all 243 residents ofblock 559 pasir ris street 51were also tested for covid-19 over may 23 and may 24, after four cases were detected in two households living in the block.
with the latest announcements, there are now five public housing blocks that have undergone or are undergoing mandatory covid-19 testing for all residents.
"obvious chains of transmission"moh looks for "obvious chains of transmission" whenever cases in the community are detected, said the ministry's director of medical services kenneth mak at a covid-19 multi-ministry task force press conference on monday.
"when we pick up several cases that occur within a fixed geographic vicinity, then we have to be concerned that there may be also chains of transmission .
.
.
to other people that live in that same area," said associate professor mak when asked about the mandatory testing at yishun.
"this is the reason why we would then extend and carry out testing operations, in this case, in a housing precinct involving several blocks of flats.
"assoc prof mak said the ministry also reinforces its testing by "looking at other data", such as wastewater testing.
when wastewater testing indicates that there are people who are still shedding the virus, this raises concerns that they may be infectious to others, he said.
"this creates an urgency for us to launch these testing operations," said assoc prof mak.
"so we look at each cluster on a case by case basis, looking at the circumstances and making the decision whether we want to organise these testing operations.
"they're not easy to do, but it's important for us to do this aggressively in order to get ahead of the curve, and to try and make sure we get control to prevent further infection occurring to others in the community.
"downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
a leading-edge research firm focused on digital transformation.
good
            

subscriber
account active
            since
            
free subscriber-exclusive audiobook!
"no rules rules: netflix and the culture of reinvention"get it now on libro.
fm using the button below.
a hong kong property developer is offering up a $1.
4 million apartment to one lucky vaccinated resident to encourage more hong kongers to get the covid-19 vaccine, shawna kwan and felix tam reported for bloomberg.
hong kong residents who are 18 or older and have received both doses of the covid-19 vaccine will be eligible to enter the random drawing by september 1, 2021, according to the news release.
the ng teng fong charitable foundation, the philanthropic arm of property developer sino group, is donating the unit.
the government is turning to businesses to entice residents to get vaccinated, according to bloomberg.
many hong kongers are hesitant to get the jab, with thousands of unused doses of the pfizer-biontech vaccine set to expire, per the report.
despite the surplus of doses, only about 13.
4% of residents are fully vaccinated and 18.
1% have gotten at least one dose, according to bloomberg's vaccine tracker.
the $1.
4 million, 449-square-foot apartment up for grabs is a one-bedroom unit in grand central, a residential complex in hong kong's kwun tong district developed by sino group.
the grand central development launched in 2018 and released another batch of units in february 2021 at prices that were 30% higher, according to the south china morning post.
the current listings in the building include a 758-square-foot apartment on the 47th floor for $2.
7 million and a 962-square-foot unit on the 50th floor for about $3.
7 million.
the foundation's director, daryl ng, said in a news release that he hopes the giveaway will encourage more hong kongers will get vaccinated.
the foundation did not immediately respond to insider's request for comment for this story.
a free apartment is quite the catch in a city known for its astronomical housing prices.
in 2020, hong kong was named the world's priciest housing market for the 10th year in a row.
the apartment in question may not be large, but it's many times the size of hong kong's tiny "coffin homes," apartments of roughly 21 square feet where around 200,000 hong kongers live due to the city's unaffordable housing costs.
despite the pandemic and months of pro-democracy protests that started in 2019, hong kong has remained the most expensive city in the world to rent a luxury apartment.
but the coming months just might tell a different story.
businesses are fleeing the city and one bloomberg report estimates that hong kong could lose up to a million people in the next five years.
another recent report from bloomberg intelligence projected that in 2021, hong kong's notoriously high rents could drop 10% and vacancy rates could hit an 18-year high.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore the b1617 covid-19 variant has infiltrated over 50 countries, outcompeted other strains and continues to infect.
it will also not be the last time the virus will mutate, experts cautioned.
but what makes this strain, first discovered in india, so good at spreading?dr sebastian maurer-stroh, virus expert and executive director of the bioinformatics institute at the agency for science, technology and research, points out four features that the b1617 strain has in common with successful virus strains.
he uses one of the three versions of the b1617 strain the second b16172 version to show what makes this virus different.
b16172 has appeared to overtake b16171 in local cases as well as those reported globally.
the third version, b16173, is rare.
first, a little primer on coronavirus biology.
what you see in the diagram below is the spike protein of a coronavirus the little spikes that give the virus its distinctive shape.
photo: a*star
the spike protein is a trimer three subunits joined together.
it is the complex shown in grey.
the green and yellow complexes are two different antibodies that bind to the spike protein.
the coloured circles represent the different mutations in b16172.
characteristic 1: the virus' mutations help it to bind more easily with the ace2 receptorace2 is short for angiotensin converting enzyme 2, which is a receptor protein in the host cell.
ace2 receptors are found in various parts of the body, including respiratory airways, and are used as entry points by the sars-cov-2 virus.
the sars-cov-2 virus gets inside a host cell through its surface spike protein.
the spike protein and the receptors have a specific 3d configuration that enables them to bind to each other.
the virus attaches only to cells that have these receptors.
the spike protein attaches to an ace2 receptor in the host cell before being activated by another enzyme.
now, let's take a closer look at one of the subunits on the spike protein to see how its mutations have helped.
photo: a*star
scientists think the l452r mutation and to a lesser extent the t478k mutation makes it easier for the virus to attach itself to the receptor and thus get inside the cell.
if binding to the receptor is easier, the virus can get inside the host cell more easily and infect more cells.
but being more infectious does not mean it can make people more ill. a more transmissible strain most often does not have more symptoms or lead to a more severe form of the disease.
characteristic 2: decreasing binding to antibodiest478k and certain other mutations which are circled near the yellow antibody probably make the virus less likely to stick to antibodies.
in a full immune response, many types of antibodies work together.
photo: a*star
though a decrease in antibody binding has yet to be proven for t478k, correlation was drawn based on existing data.
the e484k mutation found in the b1351 and p1 variants is located in the same region as t478k hence it is likely that there will be a similar effect.
even though one mutation could slightly reduce the protection derived from vaccines and prior infections, it is insufficient to remove their utility.
vaccination and natural immunity from prior infections are still very effective in reducing the chance of getting infected and spreading the disease, as well as protection against a severe form of the disease even in the case of variants.
characteristic 3: a more stable spike protein
photo: a*star
the d614g mutation has been very successful in improving spike protein stability and is found in practically all strains of the virus.
d614g results in the spike protein adopting a more open conformation, which gives it more surface area to interact with the ace2 receptor, hence increasing its infectivity.
a more stable spike protein can also mean more spike protein expressed on the virus surface, increasing its chances of infecting host cells.
d614g has been linked to increased transmissibility and a higher viral load but not increased severity.
characteristic 4: improving cleavage ratesthe spike protein needs to be cleaved into two units (called s1 and s2 units) to allow structural changes needed to enter into cells.
the diagram shows the spike protein on the sars-cov-2 virus before cleavage and the right shows what it looks like after the s1 unit has dissociated.
mutations like p681r could potentially improve cleavage rates and hence increase infectivity.
this has yet to be confirmed experimentally.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
putrajaya: measures will be taken to ensure that food supply from the agriculture, fishing and farming sectors will not be disrupted during the two-week total lockdown from tuesday (jun 1), said minister for agriculture and food industries ronald kiandee.
in a statement on monday (may 31), the minister said that follow-up measures and preparations will be taken to ensure that all agricultural and food industry networks and supply chains will not be affected when the first phase of the total lockdown takes effect.
this is to make sure that the country's continuity of its supply chain and food security are safeguarded.
"mafi (malaysian agriculture and food industries ministry) is committed to ensure that the food network and supply chain in the country remain stable, sufficient and under control, as well as accessible to the public all the time," said dr kiandee.
he said that sectors such agriculture, fishing and farming are essential services that are allowed to operate during the lockdown, subject to the approved standard operating procedures (sops).
in its announcement on sunday, the malaysian government said that17 essential service sectors and 12 manufacturing sectorswill be allowed to operate during the first phase of the lockdown.
agricultural, fishery, livestock, plantation and commodity sectors as well as their supply chains will also be allowed to run.
according to the minister, based on the livestock commodity data, the supply of meat, chickens, eggs and milk is expected to be sufficient for the country.
june figures show 22,590.
58 metric tonnes of meat, 125,067.
61 metric tonnes of chicken, about 976 million chicken eggs and more than 4.
1 million l of fresh milk.
the estimated supply of 185,000 metric tonnes of fish per month is more than enough to meet the current demand of 155,000 metric tonnes of fish, dr kiandee said.
the ministry also estimated a demand of 100,000 metric tonnes to 150,000 metric tonnes of rice during the two-week period, including in the event of panic buying.
the supply can be met with the country's current rice stock, which stands at about 764,000 metric tonnes, said dr kiandee.
to ensure that there is no disruption in the production and supply of rice, the minister said that mafi will make sure that paddy planting and mill operations can continue in accordance with the sops.
"rice distribution between wholesalers and retailers will be allowed to operate according to the sops, in order to ensure that no area or district will be cut off from supply," added dr kiandee.
opening of specific economic sectors to ensure supply chain continuity: finance ministryin a separate statement on monday, the ministry of finance said the continued opening of specific economic sectors is crucial to safeguard the people's wellbeing and to ensure the supply chain continuity for essential products and services.
noting the need to contain the covid-19 pandemic efficiently, the ministry said there is also a need to prevent any disruption to the manufacturing value chain that could threaten the continued production of goods and services feeding into essential industries.
examples of essential industries are food, health and medical equipment, pharmaceuticals and telecommunications.
"learning from lessons of mco 1.
0, the government has also allowed the related value chain of essential goods, such as packing and labelling, to operate," the statement read.
economically strategic industries such as the aerospace industry, oil and gas, manufacturing and electrical and electronics (e&e) sectors are also allowed to operate, it added.
the e&e sector represents 40 per cent or rm386 billion (us$93.
6 billion) of malaysia's annual exports, and approximately 7 per cent of global semiconductor trade, the ministry said.
"for the e&e sector, for example, the government recognises the fact that thousands of components manufactured by this sector enable critical infrastructure globally, such as healthcare and medical devices, water systems and energy grids, as well as transportation and telecommunication networks," the ministry said.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
how they can help in wealth creationtomorrow is different.
let's reshape it todaylet's get smarter about money#toughertogetherhunt for the brightest engineers in indiamental health awareness initiativethe dynamic duo of a holistic self-caredownload the economic times news app to get daily market updates & live business news.
etprime stories of the dayplastic money to internet banking to upi: dissecting india's digital-payments ecosystemflipkart's super 30: the untold story of how the walmart arm holds its stocks and sells them too'can we neuter dogecoin?
': world's most expensive joke keeps getting funnier.
investors in on it?trending nowpopular categorieshot on webin case you missed itet verticalsmore from our networkother useful linksservicesfind this comment offensive?choose your reason below and click on the report button.
this will alert our moderators to take actionreason for reporting:your reason has been reported to the admin.
log in/connect with:will be displayedwill not be displayedwill be displayedstories you might be interested in
sri lankan authorities sunday said they will sue the owners of a singapore-registered cargo carrier which has burned for 11 straight days off the island's west coast and caused some of its worst-ever marine pollution.
police said a criminal investigation was also launched into the blaze aboard the mv x-press pearl, which was carrying 25 tonnes of nitric acid and a huge amount of plastic raw materials.
the intense fire, still burning at the rear of the 186 metre (610 feet) vessel, has destroyed much of the cargo, some of which also fell into the indian ocean.
tonnes of microplastic granules have inundated the south asian nation's famed beaches, forcing a fishing ban and sparking fears of ecological devastation.
sri lanka's marine environment protection authority said it met with attorney general sanjaya rajaratnam on sunday to plan legal action against the owners of the vessel, its crew, as well as insurers.
"we have gone through the details and will be taking action against those responsible," mepa chairman dharshani lahandapura told reporters in colombo.
she said they were, however, yet to make an assessment of the environmental damage, but she believed it was the "worst marine pollution" sri lanka has ever suffered.
fire under control -sri lanka's navy chief, vice admiral nishantha ulugetenne, who was also at sunday's talks with the island's chief prosecutor, said the x-press pearl was still on fire, but the blaze was now under control.
"it will take a few more days to completely extinguish the fire," ulugetenne said, adding that his assessment was that there was no danger of the vessel breaking up.
but he ruled out towing it away from sri lankan waters until the fire was completely put out and experts examined the vessel for any structural weaknesses.
international salvage firm smit is leading efforts to douse the flames and is being assisted by sri lanka's navy and the indian coastguard.
the three-month-old ship was heading to colombo from gujarat, india.
it had previously visited qatar and dubai and was due to go to malaysia and singapore after calling at colombo.
the 25-member crew, who have already been evacuated from the ship, will be questioned on monday, police said.
authorities said last week they believed the fire was caused by a nitric acid leak that the crew had been aware of since may 11.
"the captain and the crew were in quarantine, but health authorities have told us that we can question them from tomorrow," ajith rohana, a police spokesperson, told afp.
"we have already sent samples of polluted seawater and burnt debris from the vessel for a forensic report.
"the ship's owners, x-press feeders, said the vessel's hull remained intact and there was no damage to its fuel tanks.
fishermen have been banned from the 80-kilometre (50-mile) stretch of coast, where tonnes of plastic pellets have washed up, sparking a massive clean-up effort.
fisheries minister kanchana wijesekera said the government would compensate them for their expected losses.
at least 4,500 fishermen were affected at the fishing and tourist resort of negombo, officials from the roman catholic church in the area said saturday as they pleaded for financial aid.
priest sujeewa athukorale told afp on saturday that there were also fears of reduced demand for seafood from the area over contamination fears.
aj/ohosri lanka launched a criminal probe on sunday into a massive container ship fire that has swamped the island nation's coast with plastic pollution in an unprecedented marine disaster.
tonnes of microplastic granules have inundated the south asian country's famed beaches, forcing a fishing ban and prompting fears of ecological damage.
the ministry of health (moh) on sunday (30 may) confirmed the detection of 25 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,028.
《!》ut,!british prime minister boris johnson married his fiancee carrie symonds in a "secret ceremony" on saturday, uk media reports said.
whilst the typical homeownership journey for most singaporeans is 'upgrading' from an hdb flat to a private property (e. g.   homeowners who need more space for their growing families might move from their smaller condo to a larger hdb flat.
on the other hand, an older couple may also choose to move into a smaller hdb flat once their children have moved out.
a 51-year-old woman recovering from a brain tumour died after consuming traditional chinese medicine (tcm) which likely caused her acute liver failure, the state coroner found.
smart,5%!$1,600,!the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
singapore residents will soon be able to purchase "do-it-yourself" covid-19 tests over the counter at pharmacies, said prime minister lee hsien loong on monday (31 may).
from tuesday (1 june), 400,000 students from schools and ihls can register for the covid-19 vaccine.
n1   09:00-13:00   91 | n2    10:00-14:00  716israeli and egyptian officials held talks in both countries sunday aimed at bolstering the cairo-brokered ceasefire that ended the latest deadly flare-up of violence between the jewish state and gaza's hamas rulers.
he risked everything to give his baby girl a second chance at life this article, cannabis can mean death in malaysia.
for one dad, it also meant life for his daughter.
, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
gavin macleod, a veteran supporting actor best known for his role as an ever-smiling cruise ship captain on the 1970s-80s sitcom "the love boat," died saturday at the age of 90.
$6,600「」,$100「」to enhance singapore's overall vaccine coverage and offer more flexibility, the government will allow private healthcare providers here to import and administer alternative covid-19 vaccines via special access routes (sars).
hdb resale flats are a great alternative for those who can't wait years for a bto.
compare hdb resale flat prices and trends in this comprehensive guide to resale flats in singapore.
israeli opposition leader yair lapid on monday said many obstacles remain before a diverse coalition can be built to oust veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu but voiced hope it will achieve the "greater goal".
,《》《》,,!polish police said monday they were investigating a fake bomb threat that forced a ryanair passenger plane travelling from dublin to krakow to make an emergency landing in berlin.
prime minister lee hsien loong appeared in court via video conferencing on monday (31 may) in a defamation suit against a writer from the online citizen, rubaashini who was absent from the hearing.
brazil's president jair bolsonaro promised the yanomami indigenous people in remarks released sunday that there will be no mining on their land unless they want it.
here is what whole mouth dental implants should cost you in your arearesidents of a small french town laid cards and flowers saturday at the spot where a "very kind" and "gentle" policewoman was seriously wounded in a knife attack the day before, the latest in a spate of attacks on officers.
two people were killed and at least 20 wounded early sunday when three shooters fired indiscriminately into a crowd outside a concert in the miami area, police said, the latest shooting in a year that has seen a surge in both gun sales and gun violence.
hong kong police have arrested an elderly democracy activist as she made a solo demonstration over china's deadly tiananmen crackdown in a vivid illustration of the zero protest tolerance now wielded by authorities in the financial hub.
we're tracking the latest on the coronavirus outbreak and the global response.
sign up here for our daily newsletter on what you need to know.
when bar and nightclub owners in hong kong met with city officials this month, they expected to hear how the government planned to coax more of the largely resistant population to get vaccinated, with their businesses only allowed to open to inoculated people.
instead, officials turned the tables -- asking them what they were going to do to help boost one of the slowest covid-19 vaccine takeups among global cities.
"they only asked us if we have any ideas or plans to boost the vaccination rate," said liu wai, who represents the industry as chairman of the federation of hong kong and kowloon ballroom and nightclub merchants.
a fifth of nightclubs have closed down in the five months of closure and the rest are only getting 10% of regular revenue after re-opening, he said, making them desperate to see immunization rise.
people line up outside a community vaccination center in hong kong, on april 26. photographer: chan long hei/bloombergcarrie lam's administration is increasingly leaning on local businesses and institutions to help get people vaccinated, as her beijing-backed government struggles to convince reluctant residents in an atmosphere of mistrust following widespread anti-china protests in 2019.  major companies, restaurants, and even colleges have started offering cash payouts, extra time off, even the chance to win a $1.
4 million apartment.
"government officials haven't been able to find a way of engaging with the community to build momentum for vaccination," said karen grépin, an associate professor at the university of hong kong's school of public health.
"that's where they've faltered.
but it's also really challenging for them to lead on it, from a political perspective.
it doesn't mean they should give up.
they should find ways.
but it means working through more trusted agents.
"more businesses and institutions are coming to the fore.
last week, the city's international airport announced it would give away 60,000 flight tickets to people who got vaccinated before a september deadline.
the hong kong jockey club, which runs racecourses and betting facilities, has offered up to three paid special leave days and additional insurance coverage for employees who get their shots.
even regulators are getting involved.
the hong kong monetary authority urged banks to give two days paid vaccination leave to their employees, local newspaper apple daily reported on monday.
the hkma, which declining to comment specifically on the talks, confirmed that it made the request to facilitate immunizations.
hong kong developers chinese estates holdings ltd.  and sino group's philanthropic arm ng teng fong charitable foundation are also giving out a brand-new hk$10.
8 million ($1.
4 million) apartment to residents who have been vaccinated.
vaccine appointments surged to the highest in three weeks after the apartment lottery was announced, with some 17,700 people reserving slots for the biontech se shot on saturday, while another 10,500 booked appointments for chinese maker sinovac biotech ltd. the grand central residential complex, where a $1.
4 million apartment has been offered as a grand prize for the vaccinated.
photographer: anthony wallace/afp/getty imageshongkong and shanghai hotels ltd. , which runs the city's historic peninsula hotel, has offered its 1,500 hong kong-based employees hk$2,000 to get inoculated, and an additional hk$2,000 if it's able to vaccinate 70% of its local workers.
local colleges are also taking steps to encourage shots, with the chinese university of hong kong requiring students staying in dormitories to get vaccinated, or else pay for their own covid tests every two weeks.
as many places around the world scramble for more vaccines, hong kong's government is in the unique position of having hundreds of thousands of unused doses of the mrna vaccine developed by biontech se and pfizer inc.  set to expire.
if the vaccination rate doesn't climb, the city risks being left behind as some other global hubs resume meetings and travel.
the government has tried to make vaccines more convenient, even allowing businesses to schedule on-site vaccination sessions.
in mid-may, deloitte announced 170 staff were inoculated at one such session.
just 13.
4% of hong kong residents have been fully inoculated despite being one of the few places in the world where covid shots are available to all adults, according to bloomberg's vaccine tracker.
that's well below other finance centers including singapore, at 28.
3%, and london, at 28.
6%.
leader lam, who has long brushed off suggestions to offer residents cash or similar incentives, argued last week that her government had already done its job by buying enough vaccines and making them freely available.
"we hope that economic incentives can be provided by institutions or employers," she said.
"for the government, we will focus on the policy side.
"a notice about vaccine bubbles at the entrance to a bar and restaurant in the lan kwai fong nightlife area on april 29. photographer: paul yeung/bloombergbut some business-owners and experts argue that the government's reluctance to take concrete measures -- such as relaxing mask mandates or traveler quarantine requirements of 14 to 21 days -- dilute private efforts, and in some cases contradict them.
david webb, a prominent hong kong investor and corporate governance activist, mocked the airport's offer of free flights for vaccinated people on twitter last week, noting that anyone who won a ticket would still need to shell out for quarantine.
hong kong requires all inbound travelers to quarantine in hotels, even if they have homes in the city.
"get vaccinated, win a chance to pay for 2 or 3 weeks hotel quarantine when you return?"
webb wrote.
"hardly a compelling offer from this state-owned enterprise.
"these moves to restore freedoms for vaccinated people are increasingly being undertaken worldwide.
u. s.  and south korea have both lifted outdoor mask mandates for vaccinated people, while the european union has said it will welcome vaccinated americans as tourists this summer without quarantine requirements.
the hong kong government says it can't use such incentives because of the low protection rate among the population, and the risk of new variants spreading -- though south korea's vaccination rate is currently lower than the former british colony's.
on friday, city officials said they would allow quarantine exemptions for a small number of senior bankers traveling for business.
senior bankers can now skip hong kong's three-week quarantine"if we can't have a vaccination rate of about 70%, i don't think we can relax substantially on traveling, on masking, on all the social distancing measures.
we'll be left behind," said lam ching choi, a medical doctor and member of the executive council that advises carrie lam.
hong kong's complex relationship with mainland china, which wants the city to stamp out local transmission before it'll reopen the economically vital border, is also driving officials' conservative stance.
like a handful of other covid havens in the asia-pacific region that have brought local cases down to zero, the city risks being left behind in its bid to keep out all infections, especially as other economies accept that covid-19 is endemic, and move on.
that's frustrated people who say that despite being fully inoculated, they've still been subjected to overly harsh restrictions.
for others who haven't yet gotten their shots, the lack of easing has raised questions about why they should bother.
"you can't survive like this when there's zero business," said chin chun-wing, chairman of the hong kong bar and club association.
"no one will get vaccinated just to have a drink.
"— with assistance by shawna kwan, and kiuyan wong
singapore: singapore hopes to resume normal international travel, but there is not enough data to decide whether lifting travel restrictions is possible for now, said health minister ong ye kung on monday (may 31).
mr ong was responding to a question at a covid-19 multi-ministry task force press conference about whether singapore would wait for neighbouring countries to achieve higher vaccination rates before lifting travel restrictions.
if singapore residents are vaccinated, and the country is safe, "we hope singaporeans can gain the freedom to travel", said mr ong.
this could mean travelling for business reasons or visiting relatives who are living overseas without having to serve a 21-day stay-home notice, he added.
"of course, we hope to resume that normalcy, but i think the truth is we don't have enough data to .
.
.
decide whether lifting all those restrictions is possible as of now," mr ong said.
singapore is "heading in the right direction", said the health minister.
"if we can get ourselves substantially vaccinated, protected, certainly travel restrictions will have to be reviewed with a view to restore our ability to travel and become a business hub," said mr ong.
the government has "always taken a risk-based approach" towards travel restrictions, said finance minister lawrence wong, who co-chairs the multi-ministry task force.
"if you look at our border measures, we already differentiate countries by risk and based on the infection levels in these countries.
so if a country is safe, we already allow singaporeans to go there and come back without any quarantine in singapore," he added.
"and we even allow travellers from these places to come to singapore without quarantine.
"on the other hand, if a country is not so safe, there are high incidence rates that are prevalent in these places, then we have tighter border control measures where travellers coming in will have to serve a quarantine in a dedicated facility.
"singapore will continue with this approach "in the coming months", said mr wong.
"if more countries become safe, infection rates come down, vaccination rates are high, then potentially, we will be able to open up more with these places," he added.
"on the other hand, if they are places where the incidence rates will remain high, and there are concerns (that) they are high-risk areas, then the border measures will remain and the quarantine measures will remain.
"downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
as of monday noon (31 may), the ministry of health (moh) has preliminarily confirmed an additional 23 cases of covid-19 infection in singapore.
this brings the total number of infection cases to 62,051. there are 16 new cases of locally transmitted covid-19 infection.
13 are linked to previous cases, amongst whom 11 have already been placed on quarantine, and two were detected through surveillance.
"the remaining 3 are currently unlinked," said moh.
"based on our investigations so far, the cases are in the community, and there are no new cases in the dormitories.
"in addition, there are seven new imported cases, who had been placed on stay-home notice (shn) upon arrival in singapore.
of these, four are returning singaporeans or singapore permanent residents (prs).
the ministry will share further updates in its press release tonight.
according to last night's press release, there are currently 222 confirmed cases who are still in hospital.
of these, most are stable or improving, and three are in critical condition in the intensive care unit (icu).
339 are isolated and cared for at community facilities.
these are those who have mild symptoms, or are clinically well but still test positive for covid-19.
33 have passed away from complications due to covid-19 infection.
© 2006 2021 the online citizen© 2006 2021 the online citizen
this has been over a week after lawyer syazana yahya made her police report against facebook page smrt feedback by the vigilanteh over its now-deleted facebook post published on 21 may, authorities have yet to make any statements or release any updates regarding the matter.
in the offending post that became the subject of ms syazana's report, the page expressed support for the late singaporean statesman lee kuan yew's views on being wary of placing malay-muslim singaporeans in sensitive positions such as in the air force and navy.
the straits times reported the former prime minister as saying in sep 1999:if, for instance, you put in a malay officer who's very religious and who has family ties in malaysia in charge of a machine gun unit, that's a very tricky business.
we've got to know his background .
.
.
i'm saying these things because they are real, and if i don't think that, and i think even if today the prime minister doesn't think carefully about this, we could have a tragedy.
putting a muslim singaporean "in a sensitive position where he has to deal with israeli tech", which "he knows is the same tech that is used to lay siege on palestine", said smrt feedback by the vigilanteh, would put him in a difficult predicament.
"would he then bin laden with guilt?
would his responsibilities as a singaporean be overridden by his duties as a muslim?"
the page questioned.
"lee kuan yew wasn't racist.
he just didn't want our muslim countrymen to be put in a position where they have to decide between country and god.
the best position is not having to decide at all," smrt feedback by the vigilanteh added.
in explaining why she has decided not to withdraw her police report against the page despite smrt feedback by the vigilanteh's public apology, ms syazana pointed out that many singaporeans, particularly from minority communities, were outraged by how in the cases of the nair siblings and that of workers' party member of parliament (mp) raeesah khan, the individuals who spoke up against discrimination were subjected to police investigations for offences pertaining to racism instead.
"nevertheless, many singaporeans begrudgingly accepted the decision in hopes that if the tables were turned, and a racist comment was made against minority communities instead, the state machinery will clamp down on them as they did with ms raeesah and preetipls," she said.
"in my view, the actions of ms raeesah and preetipls pales in comparison to that of smrt feedback, which associated singaporean muslims to an al-qaeda terrorist leader.
"so far, the police has yet to make any statement in regards to the police report filed by ms syazana.
toc has also written to the police to seek a response on the progress of investigation.
in comparison to this case, the police appeared to have promptly acted on a police report against sibling duo of youtube fame, preeti nair — known as preetipls — and subhas nair for the satirical rap video they made and posted online in response to a racist "brownface" ad by e-payments company nets around two years ago.
in a statement on 30 jul 2019 — a day after the video was uploaded — police said that it was investigating the matter for "offensive content" in the clip.
"the police will not tolerate any offensive content that causes ill-will between races," they said.
no action, however, was taken against those behind the e-pay ad.
nets was only given a stern reminder by the infocomm media development authority.
the attorney-general's chambers had advised that no criminal offence had been committed, according to police.
mr chew was selected by creative agency havas worldwide to star in the campaign.
havas worldwide was engaged by nets for the campaign.
in the e-pay ad, mediacorp actor and deejay dennis chew took on the role of four different characters, including a malay woman wearing a headscarf.
he also had artificially darkened skin to portray an indian man, an act commonly referred to as 'brownface'.
the rap video by the nair siblings contained lyrics with expletives, criticising chinese singaporeans for exploiting minorities in singapore for monetary gain such as what was seen in the e-pay commercial.
"the video was in clear contravention of the penal code.
if this video were to be allowed, then similar expletive-laden, insulting, offensive videos, targeted at all communities will have to be allowed," said police on why it had issued the nair siblings a two-year conditional warning each on 14 august 2019. the siblings subsequently posted an unconditional apology regarding the matter.
mediacorp had also apologised for the advertisement.
ms khan "was flamed" during the last general election campaign period for her remarks on the robertson quay and the city harvest church incident.
the current sengkang grc mp, said ms syazana, had — in her social media posts that became the subject of police reports — "sought to highlight what she perceived to be discrimination against locals/minorities compared to elite groups".
"ms raeesah put up a sincere apology.
nevertheless, the police investigated her for offences under s 298a of the penal code and issued a "stern warning" against ms raeesah," said ms syazana.
while she was "happy" that smrt feedback by the vigilanteh had apologised for its earlier post, ms syazana said that "apologies have never absolved individuals of liability and this case should not be an exception".
another case in which police had swiftly acted on reports concerning seditious material is that of sociopolitical website the real singapore (trs) co-founder and former owner yang kaiheng and his then-girlfriend ai takagi, a japanese-australian woman who is now his wife.
police arrested the couple on 6 feb 2015, a day after it received reports on "an article about the thaipusam incident" from a trs contributor, which was published by the website.
the duo was charged for sedition in apr the same year for falsely suggesting that a filipino family had caused a confrontation between police and participants during the thaipusam procession on 3 feb that year.
mr yang was sentenced to eight months' jail in jun 2016 after pleading guilty to six counts of sedition after seven days of trial.
ms takagi had earlier pleaded guilty and was sentenced to 10 months in jail.
she began serving her term in apr 2016. similar to trs' case and prior to the arrest of the two, much about the ownership of smrt feedback is unknown.
channel news asia in its 2019 report of smrt feedback affiliate news portal, observer+ only referred to the entity as being run by an unknown entity called the "council".
should investigation be launched upon the facebook page, the identities of the administrators surely would have to be revealed just as in the case of trs.
in an earlier post, ms syazana said that the post she had filed a police report over falls under sedition, as it "casts aspersions on a singaporean muslim's loyalty to its nation".
"it falsely suggests that when a muslim person is in a war with a religious element, he/she will turn his/her back on singapore," she said.
countering such an assertion, ms syazana stressed that a muslim's "primary obligation in islam is towards his family and country".
"however, a non-muslim reading this post (who may not understand islam) will likely believe this post to be true.
that a singaporean muslim's loyalty is questionable in times of war.
that singaporean muslims are predisposed to be traitors.
"this is a blatant attempt to promote feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will by non-muslims against muslims.
it is surely an offence under s 298a, penal code," she said.
under the sedition act, those found guilty of promoting feelings of ill will and hostility between different races or classes of the population of singapore may be subject, on conviction for a first offence, to a fine of up to s$5,000 or to imprisonment for a term of up to three years, or to both.
© 2006 2021 the online citizen© 2006 2021 the online citizen

                    monday, 31 may 2021
                a child is tested for covid-19 in shah alam on may 27, 2021.  afp/mohd rasfanputrajaya (bernama): malaysians should be very concerned as a total of 82,341 cases of covid-19 infection in the country involve infants and children.
the grim figure was disclosed by health minister datuk seri dr adham baba, who said of the total, 19,851 cases involved children below four years old; 8,237 cases (five to six); 26,851 (seven to 12) and 27,402 (13 to 17), and they were covid-19 patients in categories 1, 2 and 3.
"no one is in the icu (intensive care unit)," he said in a joint press conference on the development of the country's immunisation exercise, with the covid-19 national immunisation programme coordinating minister khairy jamaluddin, on monday (may 31).
dr adham advised parents or guardians to be more responsible in protecting the group from being infected, such as by not taking their children to crowded places.
according to him, although there is no provision under the prevention and control of infectious diseases act 1988 that allows compound notices to be issued to parents who take children to crowded places, investigation papers can be opened.
on the number of tests conducted for the period from may 23 to 29, he said a total of 774,863 individuals nationwide underwent the test, with 53,419 individuals testing positive for covid-19.
following the sudden increase in new cases, dr adham said that his ministry planned to expand screening testing using the antigen rapid test kit (rtk-ag), with the assistance of state governments.
"the health ministry will increase screening tests for close contacts, especially in the klang valley, by creating sampling centres in the community," he said.
to increase the detection of covid-19 positive cases in the community, he said that his ministry would increase monitoring of all symptomatic cases receiving treatment at health facilities, as well as those with a history of comorbid diseases regardless of age.
he also expressed concern over the risk of death due to covid-19, which is 0.
45% or 45 patients out of 10,000 positive cases facing the risk of death based on the rate currently recorded.
– bernama related stories:covid-19: malaysia's test positivity rate above who threshold, says dr adhamadham: more than a million vaccinated thus far

tags / keywords:
covid-19
                                                                ,
                                                                                                coronavirus
                                                                ,
                                                                                                children
                                                                ,
                                                                                                adham baba
                                                                ,
                                                                                                rapid testing
                                                                ,
                                                                                                rtk



report it to us.
thank you for your report!copyright © 1995-
            

 star media group berhad (10894d)best viewed on chrome browsers.
{{item['v1 header']}}
   {{item['v1 body']}}

  {{item['v2 header']}}

are you having urinary troubles?
by taking the survey, it is deemed that you consent to the termswe hope you enjoy this feature!
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
the b1617 variant of the sars-cov-2 virus causing covid-19 is becoming increasingly dominant worldwide and could worsen the pandemic, especially in countries with low vaccination rates, said experts in their latest assessment of the virus.
and this will not be the last time that the virus mutates, they added.
professor teo yik ying, dean of the national university of singapore's (nus) saw swee hock school of public health, told the straits times on saturday: "what is frightening is the speed at which this variant is able to spread and circulate widely within the community, often surpassing the capability of contact tracing units to track and isolate exposed contacts to break the transmission chains.
"it has the potential to unleash a bigger pandemic storm than the world has previously seen.
"b1617 has mutated to spread more easily from person to person, and may dampen the protection conferred by vaccines as well as natural infection, though only slightly, experts say.
the variant, which was first detected in india in october last year, is now found everywhere.
world health organisation (who) chief scientist soumya swaminathan said b1617 is 11/2 to two times more transmissible than the strain that first appeared in wuhan 18 months ago.
it is now present in over 50 countries and is surpassing other strains causing infections in india, such as the b117.
"on clinical severity, it's a little less clear because there have not been controlled studies which look at patients that you control for multiple factors, and then look at the impact of the strain on the clinical profile," dr soumya said at a recent webinar organised by nus' yong loo lin school of medicine.
dr soumya also said anecdotal evidence seems to indicate that more young people in india had been infected and had become seriously ill. in india, more than 27 million people have been infected with covid-19 and over 325,000 have died.
in singapore, the variant has surfaced in the two biggest community clusters in recent months in changi airport and tan tock seng hospital.
there are three versions of b1617: b16171, b16172 and b16173.
the second version is the most relevant as it has appeared to overtake b16171 in local cases as well as those reported globally.
the third version, b16173, is rare.
at this point, it remains unclear if b1617 causes more serious illness or deaths even though it is more infectious and transmissible.
prof teo said the best weapon remains widespread vaccination.
vaccinated individuals have a reduced chance of being infected, and a much lower likelihood of developing severe symptoms, even if they are infected, he added.
preliminary research in the united states carried out by the nyu grossman school of medicine and nyu langone centre showed that the pfizer-biontech and moderna vaccines should remain effective against b1617.
a study by public health england also showed that the vaccines by pfizer-biontech and astrazeneca work against b16172.
the study, conducted from april 5 to may 16, found that the pfizer-biontech shot was 88 per cent effective against the b16172 variant two weeks after the second dose.
two doses of the astrazeneca vaccine were 60 per cent effective.
but, with an outbreak on this scale, this will not be the only new variant of the pathogen, underscoring the urgency of vaccinations to confer some sort of immunity on the global community.
most countries, unfortunately, are lagging far behind in vaccinating their people.
who's european director hans kluge warned on friday that the pandemic will not be over until at least 70 per cent of people are vaccinated.
he deplored the pace of roll-out in europe, saying that while it was better, it was still "too slow".
the european centre for disease prevention and control said some 43 per cent of adults in the european union and european economic area have received at least one dose of a covid-19 vaccine as at saturday.
"time is against us," dr kluge warned, stressing the need to accelerate the immunisation campaign.
worldwide, too, the situation is not looking good.
the new york times reported that more than 1.
81 billion vaccine doses had been administered worldwide as at friday, but a stark gap remains between vaccination programmes in different countries, with some yet to report administering a single dose.
global inequity in vaccine supplies and distribution persists, and the opportunity for widespread vaccination remains a privilege for advanced economies, prof teo noted.
professor dale fisher, chair of the who's global outbreak alert and response network, said this means a higher chance of b1617 creeping into countries previously minimally affected by covid-19.
"these countries, such as thailand, cambodia, laos and vietnam, are more vulnerable due to the low vaccination rates, leaving them more susceptible to severe disease," prof fisher added.
he urged wealthier nations to lend more support to the who-backed covax programme, a global project to secure and distribute vaccines to poorer countries.
prof teo said that with over 3,000 mutations and counting, more virulent strains might emerge in countries where pandemic control is lacking.
even in vietnam, which had a good handle on the virus but saw a spike in cases this month, the authorities have detected a new variant that is a combination of the b16172 and b117 variants, and spreads quickly by air, said vietnam's health minister nguyen thanh long on saturday.
vietnam will soon publish genomic data of the newly identified variant, which replicated very quickly in the laboratory.
this could explain why so many new cases have appeared in different parts of the country in a short period of time.
prof fisher said singapore seems to have managed to curtail the potentially devastating outcome of b1617 sweeping through the community because of its strong public health measures and high vaccination rates.
but the country will not be totally safe until the rest of the world is something which will happen only if more is done globally to get all people vaccinated, prof fisher added.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore: the national parks board (nparks) said on sunday (may 30) that members of the public are encouraged to fish in a responsible manner and to use more sustainablepracticessuch as the catch-and-release.
"this is especially for juveniles, endangered and threatened species," director of nparks' national biodiversity centre dr karenne tun said in response to queries from cna.
dr tun's statement follows the emergence of a widely shared video on facebook of an angler in singapore reeling in what appears to be a white-spotted eagle ray at east coast park.
the ray, which can grow up to 3m wide, is classified as vulnerable under the international union for conservation of nature red list of threatened species.
nparks did not comment on the video or clarify where or when the ray was caught, but said ittakes a balanced approach on recreational fishing and works withother agencies to educate the fishing community to fish only at designated sites.
designated fishing sites include changi beach park and changi boardwalk, east coast park, labrador nature reserve, pasir ris park, pulau ubin, sembawang park, west coast park and woodlands waterfront park.
nparks said that it has also worked with sustainable fishing group marine stewards singapore to develop an information board at bedok jetty.
the board showcases the common fish species caught there, "as well as to promote sustainable fishing practices, including catch-and-release.
the white-spotted eagle ray is included in the 'catch-and-release' list," said dr tun.
'no fishing' areasto protect singapore's marine life and the more than 100 species of fish that can be found in singapore's waters, certain 'no fishing' areas have been designated for fish to flourish and grow to maturity, nparks said.
these include areas such as the sisters' islands marine park, sungei buloh wetland reserve, labrador nature reserve's rocky shore, chek jawa wetlands, and the waters around coney island park.
offenders can be fined up to s$5,000 for fishing in 'no fishing' areas in nparks-managed parks, and up to s$50,000 for fishing in nature reserves.
nparks also works with other agencies to carry out joint enforcement operations in nature reserves and reservoirs to curb illegal fishing, it said.
sustainable fishingdr tun said nparks has also worked with fishing communities and engaged anglers through community initiatives to promote responsible fishing and "best practices for recreational fishing".
members of the public who fish recreationally should also consider more sustainable methods of fishing, dr tun said.
each method of fishing from the hook, rod and line to fish traps and nets, "has their own characteristics and varies in their impact on the environment", she explained.
"fish traps and nets tend to be more indiscriminate, and when lost in the sea, will continue to trap and kill fish and other marine life.
"nets that settle onto the seabed could also entangle corals or other bottom-dwelling organisms, and can smother them to death.
"for this reason, net fishing and the use of wire mesh traps are not allowed in areas managed by nparks," said dr tun.
nparks also encourages catch-and-release fishing, where fish that are not going to be eaten are released back into the sea.
"responsible fishing practices will help us maintain our rich biodiversity and will the population to continue to thrive," said dr tun.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.

						keep abreast of significant corporate, financial and political developments around the world.
stay informed and spot emerging risks and opportunities with independent global reporting, expert
						commentary and analysis you can trust.
then hk$505 per monthnew customers onlycancel anytime during your trial
									or
best value save 20%

										then hk$664 every 3 months
									

					sign in
				
international edition
singapore: singapore reported 16 new covid-19 cases in the community as of noon on monday (may 31), including three with no links to previous infections.
thirteen were linked to previous cases, with 11 already on quarantine and two detected through surveillance, said the ministry of health (moh).
there were also seven imported cases, all of whom were placed on stay-home notice upon arrival in singapore.
one singaporean and three permanent residents who returned from india, indonesia, malaysia and the philippines are among the imported cases.
another three are work permit holders who arrived from indonesia and myanmar, of whom one is a foreign domestic worker.
no new infections were reported in migrant workers' dormitories.
in all, singapore reported 23 new covid-19 cases on monday.
white sands primary school employee among unlinked casesa 60-year-old singaporean is among the three unlinked infections.
the woman, who is fully vaccinated, works in an administrative role at white sands primary school.
she developed a fever, cough and runny nose on may 28 and sought treatment at a general practitioner clinic on may 30.  she underwent both an antigen rapid test (art) and polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test, and both test results came back positive for covid-19 infection on the same day.
her serology test result is pending.
the other two cases are a 68-year-old singaporean who works as a manager at phoenix entertainment karaoke tv music lounge and a 72-year-old singaporean homemaker.
both experienced symptoms such as headache and cough prior to testing positive for covid-19.
hong ye group cleaners clusterfour more cases have been linked to the hong ye group cleaners cluster, which now has a total of 21 infections.
there is an 11-year-old singaporean who is a student at new town primary school.
he was last in school on may 18 and developed a fever on may 20 but did not seek medical attention.
the boy subsequently developed a fever, diarrhea and vomiting on may 26 and sought medical treatment at a general practitioner clinic the next day, where he was diagnosed with stomach flu and was therefore not tested for covid-19.
he was later identified as a household contact of five covid-19 cases, and placed on quarantined on may 28.  he was tested for covid-19 on may 30 and his result came back positive on the same day while his serology test result is pending.
the second case is an 18-year-old singaporean who is employed by hong ye group as a cleaner at changi business park.
as he had been identified as a contact of a previously confirmed case another hong ye group cleaner who also worked at changi business park he was placed on phone surveillance on may 27. on the same day, he developed a cough and runny nose but did not report his symptoms or seek medical attention.
he developed a loss of taste and smell on may 29 and sought medical treatment at a clinic on the same day, where he underwent both an art and pcr test.
moh said he was immediately isolated when his art result came back positive the same day.
his pcr test result came back positive for covid-19 infection on may 30 and his serology test result is negative.
the other cases include an 18-year-old singaporean who is a full-time national serviceman at the civil defence academy.
he is a family member and household contact of three other confirmed covid-19 cases and was quarantined on may 28. the fully vaccinated teenager was tested for covid-19 on may 30 during quarantine and developed a sore throat on the same day.
his test result came back positive for covid-19 infection on may 30 and his serology test result is pending.
the remaining case is a 16-year-old singaporean who is currently unemployed.
he is also a household contact of five other covid-19 cases and was quarantined on may 28.  he developed a cough and sore throat on the same day but did not report his symptoms.
he was tested for covid-19 on may 30 during quarantine and his test result came back positive for covid-19 infection on the same day.
his serology test result is pending.
ntuc foodfare clustertwo more cases have been linked to the ntuc foodfare cluster, which now has a total of nine infections in total.
one of the new cases is a 33-year-old permanent resident who had already been quarantined.
he works as a supervisor at hua zai hk style roasted delight rice noodle and is a household contact of five previously confirmed cases.
the other new case is a 33-year-old malaysian who works as a kitchen assistant at hua zai hk style roasted delights at 308 achorvale road and 476d upper serangoon view.
he developed a cough and runny nose on may 30 and sought medical treatment at a clinic where he underwent both an art and pcr test.
he was immediately isolated when his art result came back positive on the same day.
his pcr test result came back positive for covid-19 on may 30 and his serology test result is negative.
new clustera new cluster has been identified, linked to a 49-year-old singaporean who works as an executive at eng soon chair & table hire service.
the woman, known as case 63844, was confirmed to have covid-19 on may 28. two new cases reported on monday have been linked to the woman, bringing the total number of infections in this cluster to three.
the latest cases are an 82-year-old singaporean retiree and a 54-year-old singaporean who works as a senior executive at eng soon chair & table hire service.
both of them are the family members of case 63844.
3 existing clusters growmore cases have been linked to three existing clusters.
a 33-year-old singaporean who works as a manager at changi airport group has been linked to a 31-year-old singaporean who works as a property agent with era realty.
the cluster now has six infections.
two new cases are linked to cluster involving a 15-year-old student at westwood secondary school.
one of the new cases is a nine-year-old singaporean student from chua chu kang primary school who also attends student care at happy star learning hub student care & tuition centre.
the other case is a 45-year-old singaporean homemaker.
both cases are family members and household contacts of previously confirmed covid-19 cases and were asymptomatic.
the cluster now has a total of six infections.
another community case reported on monday is linked to a third cluster involving a previously confirmed case, a 74-year-old singaporean retiree.
a 56-year-old singaporean homemaker has been linked to him, bringing the total number of infections in this cluster to four.
the woman tested positive for covid-19 on may 30 during quarantine and subsequently developed a cough that evening.
moh said her serology test result is negative for the n antigen, which suggests the presence of early infection.
the woman received her first dose of the covid-19 vaccine on apr 27. malaysian admin worker among linked casesthe remaining linked covid-19 community case is a 30-year-old malaysian administrative employee at sin wei precision mechanical.
he is a household contact of a previously confirmed case – a 35-year-old malaysian who worked at kota zheng zong bak kut teh (serangoon gardens) – and was quarantined on may 17. he was tested for covid-19 on may 22 and his test result was negative.
he developed a fever and cough on may 27 but did not report his symptoms until may 30, said moh.
the man was then tested for covid-19 and his test result came back positive on the same day.
his serology test result is negative.
decrease in new community casesoverall the number of new cases in the community has decreased from 185 cases in the week before to 128 cases in the past week.
the number of unlinked cases in the community has also decreased from 32 cases in the week before to 26 cases in the past week.
among the 191 cases reported from may 25 to may 31, 45 cases have tested positive for their serology tests while 110 have tested negative.
another 36 serology test results are pending.
moh said 25 more cases have been discharged from hospitals or community isolation facilities, bringing singapore's total recoveries to 61,459. there are 223 cases still in hospital.
most of them are stable or improving, and two are in critical condition in the intensive care unit.
another 336 are isolated and cared for at community facilities.
as of monday, singapore has reported a total of 62,051 covid-19 cases and 33 fatalities from the disease.
singapore "on track" to bringing covid-19 outbreak under controlprime minister lee hsien loong said singapore "should be on track" tobringing its covid-19 outbreak under control, barring any super-spreader events or large clusters.
if the number of community cases falls further, the country "should be" able to relaxexisting restrictionsunder the phase 2 (heightened alert) period after jun 13, the date that they are currently set to last until, mr lee said in anaddress to the nationon monday.
mr lee also announced plans tomake covid-19 testing part of the new normal, as well as theacceleration of the national vaccination programme, withvaccination bookings for studentsto open on jun 1. the elderly were also urged to come forward for their vaccination.
nearly three quarters of the elderly – 760,000 senior citizens aged 60 and above – have had at least one jab or booked a slot already, but 280,000 have still not yet booked appointments, mr lee said.
those above 60 can now walk into any vaccination centre and get vaccinated on the spot with no need to register or book in advance.
those who are immobile can also be jabbed during home visits by medical professionals, he added.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
country to enter near-total lockdown after record daily cases for five consecutive dayslast modified on mon 31 may 2021 09.
34 bstmalaysia's intensive care units are struggling to cope with a sharp rises in covid cases, the health director general has warned, as the country prepares to enter a near total lockdown from tuesday.
malaysia managed to avoid the worst of the pandemic last year, but has struggled to contain a recent outbreak that has been driven by more infectious variants of the virus, and exacerbated by gatherings ahead of eid al-fitr.
this month alone, more than 1,200 deaths have been recorded, compared with 471 during the whole of 2020.  last week, malaysia reported record daily cases for five consecutive days and announced its highest daily rise since the start of the pandemic on saturday, when 9,020 new infections were reported.
the health director general, noor hisham abdullah, said that although extra icu beds had been created, some facilities had already reached full capacity.
"this has led to patients being treated in normal wards," he said in a statement on facebook on sunday.
the surge in cases over the weekend meant that the number of patients with severe illness was expected to rise further, he added.
additional containers have also been sent to hospital morgues, which are struggling to cope with the rise in deaths.
under new lockdown rules, which will be introduced on tuesday, only two people from each household will be allowed to go out to buy essentials or seek medical treatment within 10km of their home.
sports activities such as jogging that do not involve physical contact are permitted but only between 7am and 8pm.
schools and shopping malls will be shut.
much of the manufacturing sector will be allowed to continue operating with a reduced workforce.
this includes companies producing rubber gloves, electronics, oil and gas, chemical products and food and beverages.
malaysia is among several south-east asian countries, including thailand and singapore, that managed to keep the virus under control last year, but which have reported sudden increases in cases.
the region is facing new, more infectious variants but is struggling to roll out vaccination campaigns quickly.
the malaysian government has said it will to set up five more mass vaccination centres in the capital, kuala lumpur, and that private doctors will join immunisation efforts to boost capacity.
so far, almost 6% of the country's 32 million population have received at least one vaccine dose.
the government reached 107,000 doses a day last week and aims to increase daily vaccinations to 150,000 doses.
human rights groups have warned that malaysia's health campaigns are likely to be hindered by its hostile treatment of migrants and refugees.
the immigration department announced it will carry out raids and surprise checks throughout the two-week lockdown.
many migrants are fearful of coming forward to access medical care, even though the government has announced that all people will qualify for vaccines, regardless of their immigration status, said john quinley, senior human rights specialist for the ngo fortify rights.
"those are well-founded fears – of people being sent back to countries of origin that have ongoing war and persecution, or of just not being able to economically provide for your family because you've been put in detention," he said.
last year, malaysia arrested thousands of migrants and held them in overcrowded detention centres, which subsequently experienced outbreaks of the virus.
it is feared that additional arrests will only lead to further clusters inside cramped facilities.
beijing/taipei: china and taiwan traded more accusations on monday (may 31) about covid-19 vaccines, with beijing saying they should not be a political tool while taiwan's ruling party said china was the "black hand" preventing it accessing shots internationally.
the two have sparred repeatedly since the pandemic started, over everything from china's transparency about the virus' spread to taiwan's lack of full access to the world health organization, worsening already bad ties.
japan said on friday it would consider sharing covid-19 vaccines with other countries as a ruling party panel urged that part of its stock of astrazeneca doses be provided to chinese-claimed taiwan, which welcomed the news.
taiwan is battling a spike in domestic infections and has vaccinated less than 2 per cent of its people, while japan has secured more than 400 million doses, or double what its adult population needs.
speaking in beijing, chinese foreign ministry spokesman wang wenbin said they had "noted" that japan cannot even guarantee its own people enough vaccines at the moment, and that many people in taiwan had doubts about the offer.
"i want to emphasise that vaccine assistance should return to the original purpose of saving lives, and should not be reduced to a tool for political self-interest," he said.
china has offered taiwan vaccines, but taiwan says made-in-china shots have too many safety concerns.
taiwan has also accused china of blocking a deal with germany's biontech, which beijing denies.
taiwan's ruling democratic progressive party said china's comment last week that taiwan would not succeed in using vaccines to seek its independence showed china was the "black hand behind the scenes" preventing taiwan from getting access to vaccines internationally.
the wide use of vaccines is essential to ultimately controlling the virus, it said.
"however, in the face of the pandemic, china has used it as a political bargaining chip to prevent taiwan from obtaining vaccines from the world," the party added.
china considers democratically-ruled taiwan its own territory.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
submitted by stomper anonymousclick here to submit a story or submit it to our whatsapp.
click here to submit a story or submit it to our whatsapp.
police are investigating an incident in which a man allegedly confronted a woman, insisted that her infant wear a mask and made racist remarks against her at bedok reservoir.
stomper anonymous, who is an indian singaporean, said the incident occurred last tuesday morning (may 25) at around 8.
30am.
according to anonymous, she had been taking a walk while pushing her seven-month-old son in a stroller when a man "confronted" her.
she recounted: "an elderly gentleman came up to me and started asking why my baby was not in a mask.
he insisted that my baby wear a mask.
"i politely moved away and informed him that my son is seven months old and therefore not required a mask.
"the man retorted that 'you indians don't follow the rules' and said 'when you indians come to singapore, follow singapore rules and not indian ones'.
"he then proceeded to snap pictures of my son.
"i walked behind him a little bit and asked he could take photos of my child without permission, but he tried to take more pictures of me and my son.
"he then continued his tirade about how my baby must wear a mask, after which i just left and returned home.
"the stomper subsequently decided to lodge a police report on the same day as she was concerned about the man being "in possession of an unsolicited photo of a minor".
she added: "singapore is my country and home, and it saddens me to hear that some people believe otherwise.
"we are all in this together and i hope sharing my experience will remind everyone that there is no room for racism in singapore.
"in response to a stomp query, the police confirm that a report was lodged and investigations are ongoing.
get more of stomp's latest updates by following us on facebook, whatsapp, twitter, instagram and youtube.
view the discussion thread.
view the discussion thread.
download the new stomp app today.
sph digital news | the straits timesall rights reserved | terms & conditions | data protection policy | advertise with ussph digital news / stomp / copyright (c) 2019 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
singapore — covid-19 vaccination guidelines in singapore have been eased for pregnant women, breastfeeding women, cancer patients currently receiving treatment, and persons who have previously suffered severe skin allergy reactions to medications.
the expert committee on covid-19 vaccination (ec19v) has been monitoring evidence and developments around the world and has revised its guidelines accordingly, the multi-ministry taskforce (mtf) on the pandemic said at a virtual press briefing on monday (31 may).
there was no evidence to suggest that the pfizer-biontech or moderna covid-19 vaccines may cause harm to pregnant women or their babies, the mtf stated.
however, the committee noted that the amount of data collected on the population segment was still much smaller compared to data on the general population.
it advised pregnant women to discuss the risks and benefits with their doctors to make an informed decision on the vaccination.
pregnant women will be able to register and book a vaccination appointment from 4 june, if they are part of the population group eligible for vaccination.
similarly, the two vaccines have been deemed to be safe for breastfeeding women and there is no need to stop breastfeeding while receiving the jabs, the ec19v said.
cancer patients on active cancer treatment remain at an increased risk of complications from covid-19 but there was no evidence of any safety signals or increased rates of adverse events from mrna-based covid-19 vaccines, noted the authorities.
director of medical services kenneth mak noted that moh had previously exercised "considerable caution" and advised that these patients complete their treatment before getting vaccinated.
"at this time, we prefer for these patients to be vaccinated in a hospital setting where they can be better monitored for their health status.
and we will review later whether these conditions can be revised.
"persons with severe cutaneous adverse reactions (scar), or sever skin allergy reactions to medications, can also receive both vaccines, even though they were previously not recommended to do so.
scar includes stevens-johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms, and drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome.
"these are very severe reactions that occur as a result of taking various types of medications," explained prof mak.
"and if you have previously had such a severe allergic reaction to medications like antibiotics, you will now be eligible to receive your covid-19 vaccination.
"the ec19v is also reviewing safety data on persons with a history of anaphylaxis, to allow more to be safely vaccinated, it added.
the committee said it intends to complete the review in the next two weeks, and will set out guidelines allowing certain persons who have had previous history of anaphylaxis to be vaccinated using mrna vaccines safely.
prof mak said, "we hope that these adjustments to our guidance will offer vaccination opportunities for more people and allow them to benefit from the enhanced immune protection that vaccination offers.
"stay in the know on-the-go: join yahoo singapore's telegram channel at http://t.
me/yahoosingaporerelated stories:possible easing of covid restrictions after 13 june if community cases fall further: lee hsien loongsingapore to make over-the-counter diy covid-19 tests available to residentscovid-19: vaccination bookings for singapore students to begin from 1 june400,000 students in singapore can register for covid vaccine from 1 june'very unlikely' to resume phase 3 straight after 13 june: lawrence wongsingapore to allow alternative covid-19 vaccines for use by private sectorhousehold members of close contact of covid-19 case to be isolated immediately: pm leehousehold contacts of quarantined persons must self-isolate at home: mohsri lanka launched a criminal probe on sunday into a massive container ship fire that has swamped the island nation's coast with plastic pollution in an unprecedented marine disaster.
tonnes of microplastic granules have inundated the south asian country's famed beaches, forcing a fishing ban and prompting fears of ecological damage.
the ministry of health (moh) on sunday (30 may) confirmed the detection of 25 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,028.
《!》ut,!british prime minister boris johnson married his fiancee carrie symonds in a "secret ceremony" on saturday, uk media reports said.
whilst the typical homeownership journey for most singaporeans is 'upgrading' from an hdb flat to a private property (e. g.   homeowners who need more space for their growing families might move from their smaller condo to a larger hdb flat.
on the other hand, an older couple may also choose to move into a smaller hdb flat once their children have moved out.
a 51-year-old woman recovering from a brain tumour died after consuming traditional chinese medicine (tcm) which likely caused her acute liver failure, the state coroner found.
???,.
,,,.
the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
singapore residents will soon be able to purchase "do-it-yourself" covid-19 tests over the counter at pharmacies, said prime minister lee hsien loong on monday (31 may).
from tuesday (1 june), 400,000 students from schools and ihls can register for the covid-19 vaccine.
citi | wharton global wealth institute,israeli and egyptian officials held talks in both countries sunday aimed at bolstering the cairo-brokered ceasefire that ended the latest deadly flare-up of violence between the jewish state and gaza's hamas rulers.
he risked everything to give his baby girl a second chance at life this article, cannabis can mean death in malaysia.
for one dad, it also meant life for his daughter.
, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
gavin macleod, a veteran supporting actor best known for his role as an ever-smiling cruise ship captain on the 1970s-80s sitcom "the love boat," died saturday at the age of 90. yahoo,,,『,』,!to enhance singapore's overall vaccine coverage and offer more flexibility, the government will allow private healthcare providers here to import and administer alternative covid-19 vaccines via special access routes (sars).
hdb resale flats are a great alternative for those who can't wait years for a bto.
compare hdb resale flat prices and trends in this comprehensive guide to resale flats in singapore.
israeli opposition leader yair lapid on monday said many obstacles remain before a diverse coalition can be built to oust veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu but voiced hope it will achieve the "greater goal".
$6,600「」,$100「」polish police said monday they were investigating a fake bomb threat that forced a ryanair passenger plane travelling from dublin to krakow to make an emergency landing in berlin.
prime minister lee hsien loong appeared in court via video conferencing on monday (31 may) in a defamation suit against a writer from the online citizen, rubaashini who was absent from the hearing.
brazil's president jair bolsonaro promised the yanomami indigenous people in remarks released sunday that there will be no mining on their land unless they want it.
,《》《》,,!residents of a small french town laid cards and flowers saturday at the spot where a "very kind" and "gentle" policewoman was seriously wounded in a knife attack the day before, the latest in a spate of attacks on officers.
two people were killed and at least 20 wounded early sunday when three shooters fired indiscriminately into a crowd outside a concert in the miami area, police said, the latest shooting in a year that has seen a surge in both gun sales and gun violence.
hong kong police have arrested an elderly democracy activist as she made a solo demonstration over china's deadly tiananmen crackdown in a vivid illustration of the zero protest tolerance now wielded by authorities in the financial hub.
cox's bazar, bangladesh: more than 20 horses have died of starvation in just one month at bangladesh's most popular resort district, the animals' owners said on sunday (may 30), as the country's tourism industry reels from the pandemic's economic fallout.
the south asian nation of 168 million people is battling a fresh wave of coronavirus infections that has stretched its healthcare system and triggered a nationwide lockdown.
the horses' owners said they were struggling to afford fodder for their animals, which are used for tourist rides at cox's bazar beach one of the world's longest.
"once coronavirus hit, tourist numbers .
.
.
sharply dropped to a trickle," farida begum, spokesperson of the cox's bazar horse owners association, told afp.
"we are struggling to make ends meet.
how can we feed the horses?
"tourists had briefly returned to the district from december to february when infections slowed, but visits dried up under the fresh lockdown imposed from apr 14. at least 21 horses out of up to 90 used for tourists at the beach died over the past month while others were emaciated, begum said.
during last year's lockdown, 41 horses including eight of begum's own died, she added.
some owners have set their horses free, hoping they can survive by eating grass or foraging for food.
the horse owners say they have been struggling to feed their own families, with many taking out loans from microlenders just to make ends meet.
"officials from the microlender come to my home every week and badger me to pay back the loan in instalments.
but unless the tourists start arriving in cox's bazar, i can't pay back the money," begum said, adding that she had borrowed 100,000 taka (us$1,200).
dozens of horse handlers usually hired by the owners to help tourists with the rides have switched to driving rickshaws or construction work.
"no tourists means no income"the resort town usually attracts more than 2 million mostly domestic tourists every year.
but under the nationwide lockdown, offices and markets are shut and public transport has been halted.
horse owner sarwar azam told afp that one of his animals died last week and the second was also going hungry.
the head of a local horse owners' organisation, nishan ahsan whose four animals died during last year's lockdown said his members had received limited aid from the government.
"during the peak tourism time, a horse can earn up to 2,000 taka (us$23) a day.
we would set aside a slice of that income for the horses' food, which is expensive," ahsan told afp.
"but no tourists means no income for us.
"the government administrator for cox's bazar, sumaiya akter, said she had only heard of four to five horses dying in the past eight months.
she added that the government had given the owners 146 sacks of husks and 20 cans of molasses since may 9. bangladesh has recorded nearly 800,000 coronavirus infections and more than 12,300 deaths since the start of the pandemic, but experts say the actual numbers are likely to be much higher.
just over 6 per cent of the population has received the first vaccine dose, while the government has said it is running out of jabs as it tries to combat the latest devastating virus wave.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
berlin (afp) the coach of naomi osaka says she is using her superstar status to force change with her controversial media boycott at the french open.
"naomi has the opportunity to use her status to address problems and to initiate things," osaka's belgian coach wim fissette told german magazine der spiegel.
"in the united states, the subject is very topical at the moment, as athletes want more freedom in dealing with the press.
"so that they are simply not threatened right away with punishment if they don't feel well for a day.
"on sunday (may 30) , officials at roland garros threatened osaka, the world no.
2, with disqualification if she persists in boycotting media press conferences, which she claims are detrimental to her mental health.
the 23-year-old was fined us$15,000 (s$19,900) for refusing to attend a press conference after her opening 6-4, 7-6 (7-4) victory over romanian world no.
63 patricia maria tig.
following her win, osaka agreed only to a cursory on-court tv interview.
osaka has likened traditional post-match press conferences to "kicking people when they're down", but french tennis federation president gilles moretton has described her vow of silence as "a phenomenal error".
however, following her win over tig, osaka stood firm by tweeting: "anger is a lack of understanding.
change makes people uncomfortable.
"in the spiegel interview, fissette also insisted osaka "knows it's important to talk to the press" and is not boycotting the media "for herself alone", but is "concerned with fundamental issues she wants to bring about change".
earlier this year, the japanese superstar won the fourth grand slam title of her career at the australian open, but has never got past the third round of the french open.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore come rain or shine, grace (not her real name) sleeps every night on a mattress laid out in the balcony.
a single mother, she has been working in singapore for close to a decade, supporting her daughter back home in india.
after a seven-year stint with another employer, she transferred to a new workplace about two years ago.
since then, she has not had a room of her own, and was left without wages for four months when her employers were overseas during the pandemic.
"some days, i wake up to droplets of rain on my face.
when the family went to stay with relatives overseas for about four months last year, they said i was free to stay in their house but would have to provide for myself as i did not have to pick up after them.
"i had to count every penny of my savings to feed myself and send something back home to my daughter," she said.
after the employers' return to singapore, they resumed paying grace her wages.
the manpower ministry's recent initiatives to conduct random house visits and expand in-person interviews with domestic helpers was a ray of hope for grace.
"when i saw media reports of this new measure, i showed them to my employer and said: 'they may visit us and i might open up to them. '
i finally feel like someone cares for my well-being here," she said.
case worker jaya anil kumar from the humanitarian organisation for migration economics (home) said failure to pay salary is a breach of regulations under the employment of foreign manpower act.
even then, there are no laws that guarantee a worker can switch employer in such cases, although home has successfully helped workers in their appeals.
those seeking support can contact the mom helpline (1800-339-5505) or the centre for domestic employees' 24-hour helpline (1800-225-5233).
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.

                    sunday, 30 may 2021
                li (left) meeting with muhyiddin via video link recently.
— xinhuatwo fridays ago, the prime ministers of malaysia and china held a meeting via video link, discussing bilateral issues ranging from investment, digital economy, manufacturing, agriculture to marine infrastructure and cooperation in combating covid-19 pandemic.
according to official bernama's report, malaysia and china are exploring new areas of to strengthen bilateral collaboration, and these include aspects of covid-19 vaccine production through the "fill and finish" method here and collaboration in electronic commerce, high technology and digital economy.
"the chinese government has given a very positive response for these proposed collaborations.
.
.
both of us agreed that malaysia-china bilateral ties have remained close and continued to expand positively in the face of bitter challenges arising from the covid-19 pandemic, " said tan sri muhyiddin jassin on his facebook.
on covid-19, muhyiddin said both leaders saw the need for closer and more proactive cooperation to overcome the pandemic and drive the economic recovery process, including continued collaboration in vaccine supply and food security.
and according to china's official news agency xinhua, chinese premier li keqiang said beijing supports malaysia in improving its vaccine production capacity and epidemic prevention experts of the two countries to enhance exchanges and experience sharing.
li also said china hopes malaysia will ensure that "chinese citizens in malaysia are vaccinated soon" and in reply, muhyiddin said putrajaya will provide convenience for chinese citizens to get inoculated.
malaysia is the first country to sign an intergovernmental cooperation agreement on covid-19 vaccines and make a reciprocal arrangement for vaccination with china.
for muhyiddin, this may 21 meeting was important to him as it was his first meeting with a top leader from china – the region's largest economy – since he became prime minister in march last year.
in fact, this meeting was originally scheduled to be held in china earlier.
but muhyiddin's official visit to beijing had to be postponed in view of the emergency rule and political instability in malaysia, according to a source.
however, for malaysians following the news, it was the topic on bilateral cooperation in vaccination and combating covid-19 that had caught their attention.
all else does not matter to malaysians now, as their key focus is on the covid-19 crisis, which is getting worse despite unfettered powers enjoyed by the government under the emergency rule that began on jan 11 and not expected to end soon.
for the past weeks, malaysians have witnessed local daily new covid-19 cases surpassing the 7,000 mark and death numbers hitting record highs in recent weeks.
as of last wednesday, covid-19 cases in malaysia totalled 533,367 while death toll was at 2,432. according to a cnbc report last wednesday, malaysia's daily covid-19 infections per million people – on a seven-day rolling basis – have exceeded that of india since last sunday.
malaysia reported on tuesday 205.
1 cases per million people on a seven-day rolling basis, higher than india's 150.
4 cases, according to cnbc.
malaysia has 32.
7 million people, much fewer than india's 1.
4 billion.
the cnbc data indicate that malaysia is now the worst covid-hit country in the world.
this is ironical given that in the first half of last year, the world health organisation described malaysia's covid-19 response as "strong and robust".
chinese experts who were in malaysia then to share their experience in combating epidemic in wuhan, the first area in the world to be hit by the covid-19 epidemic, had also given malaysia the thumbs up.
but on top of all this, malaysia – like other countries – is also infected by the indian covid variants that spread and kill more ferociously.
hence, its battleground is filled with more types of enemies.
what does not help is the country's slow progress in mass inoculation.
this has sparked discontent and raised anxiety – not only among locals, but also foreigners and their families residing in malaysia.
as of may 26, only 2.
583 million vaccine doses had been administered in malaysia.
this figure was behind that of cambodia, singapore, thailand, myanmar, the philippines and indonesia, according to data compiled by sin chew daily.
beijing is now worried about its nationals here.
this can be seen from a china daily report that wrote: "premier li hopes malaysia guarantees early inoculation of chinese citizens in malaysia.
"for china's citizens, they are blessed with a government that cares about their safety – even for those overseas.
indeed, the chinese embassy has sent out preventive anti-covid medicine to its countrymen in malaysia.
it is not clear whether china will be allowed to send its experts here to inoculate its own people, like what china is doing in thailand now.
according an ap report, chinese citizens living in thailand have been vaccinated from may 20 as part of china's global campaign to inoculate its people abroad.
about150,000 chinese citizens live in thailand.
from the reports of bernama, xinhua and china daily, it is clear that beijing is keen to lend a hand to putrajaya on the continuous supply of vaccines and speeding up the current inoculation programme.
when the covid-19 first hit malaysia last year, beijing sent personal protective equipment (ppe) and its experts to help putrajaya contain the virus.
in fact, beijing has a policy of using its vaccines to do global public good.
on may 21, president xi jinping announced china would provide an additional us$3bil (about rm13bil) in international aid over the next three years to support covid-19 response and economic recovery in developing countries.
making these remarks during a speech at the global health summit via video link from beijing, xi said china has already supplied 300 million doses of covid-19 vaccines to the world and will provide more.
he noted that china has given us$2bil in assistance to combat covid-19 in developing countries, and have sent medical supplies to 150 countries, provided 280 billion masks and 4.
0 billion testing kits to the world.
in the case of malaysia, it is in the interest of beijing to see putrajaya getting back to normalcy fast.
china has been the largest trading partner of malaysia for the last 12 consecutive years, and its investments in this asean country are sizeable and continue to rise.
as getting malaysia out off the current crisis will be good for putrajaya and beijing, malaysia should respond to any help extended by china in inoculation and overcoming the health crisis.
a reliable supply of ample vaccines and an effective strategy to speed up the vaccination rate is important.
from news flow, china has the capacity to make billion of vaccines this year and is carrying out a mass immunisation exercise efficiently.
while china's sinopharm vaccine has just been listed by the who as "safe and effective" for global use, sinovac's vaccine is awaiting who recognition.
in fact, with malaysia's current medical standard and reasonably good health infrastructure, many believe that it is capable of bringing forward its year-end target to have 80% of its 32.
7 million people vaccinated, if the right policies and strategies are employed.
if bangkok could set target to inoculate 70% of its 66 million population to by september to achieve herb immunity, there is no reason why malaysia – more developed and richer – cannot work faster.
the same argument goes for indonesia, with 270 million people.
according to a nikkei report last week, indonesia has now received 83.
9 million doses of vaccines from sinovac.
with warnings from health director-general tan sri dr noor hisham abdullah that covid-19 cases are expected to rise further, economist lee heng guie says malaysia has to reset its "virus war" strategy and vaccination must be accelerated.
"there is nothing wrong to rectify our recourse and learn from countries that have done well (china, new zealand and singapore) in the aspects of testing and tracing, communication, gaining pubic trust, influencing public behaviour etc, " says lee, executive director of socio-economic research centre.
"compliance to the covid-19 is everyone's collective responsibility.
all political leaders must demonstrate good leadership.
the sop must be strictly enforced, regardless of status.
the rules and guidelines need to be clear, consistent and sensible, " he adds in an email.
the economist believes practising transparency can instil public trust on the government's vaccination programme.
"it is vital to provide data on the supply of vaccines by type; the outstanding stocks and the incoming supply on a regular basis, " he opines.
as half a million residents in malaysia are still infected and many lives are at stake, putrajaya needs to respond correctly with urgency.
it must display strong political will to save the nation and restore normal life.
tags / keywords:
ho wah foon
                                                                ,
                                                                                                anything chinese
                                                                ,
                                                                                                column
                                                                ,
                                                                                                vaccine

topic:



report it to us.
thank you for your report!copyright © 1995-
            

 star media group berhad (10894d)best viewed on chrome browsers.
{{item['v1 header']}}
   {{item['v1 body']}}

  {{item['v2 header']}}

are you having urinary troubles?
by taking the survey, it is deemed that you consent to the termswe hope you enjoy this feature!
people in hanoi wait to be tested for covid-19 at a makeshift testing centre near bach mai hospital/afpvietnam has discovered a new covid-19 variant which spreads quickly by air and is a combination of the indian and british strains, health officials confirmed saturday.
the country is struggling to deal with fresh outbreaks across more than half of its territory, including industrial zones and big cities such as hanoi and ho chi minh city.
more than 6,800 cases including 47 deaths have been reported in vietnam, with the lion's share occurring since april.
"we have discovered a new hybrid variant from the indian and the uk strains," health minister nguyen thanh long told a national meeting on the pandemic saturday, according to state media.
"the characteristic of this strain is that it spreads quickly in the air.
the concentration of virus in the throat fluid increases rapidly and spreads very strongly to the surrounding environment.
"he did not specify the number of cases recorded with this new variant but said vietnam will soon announce the discovery in the world's map of genetic strains.
vietnam's central institute of hygiene and epidemiology said in a statement saturday that its scientists had detected gene mutations in four out of 32 patient samples through gene sequencing.
there were seven known coronavirus variants in vietnam before long's announcement, according to the ministry of health.
the communist country has previously received widespread applause for its aggressive pandemic response, with mass quarantines and strict contact tracing helping keep infection rates relatively low.
the new round of infections has made the public and government fearful and authorities have quickly moved to place strict limits on movement and business activity.
cafes, restaurants, hair salons and massage parlours as well as tourism and religious spots have been ordered to close in various areas of the country.
vietnam — a country of 97 million people — has vaccinated a little over a million citizens.
it is now ramping up its jab rollout and hopes to achieve herd immunity by the end of the year, according to the health minister.
authorities have called on people and businesses to donate money to help procure vaccines, while embassies and international organisations have been contacted for assistance, state media reported.
the country presently has close to two million doses of astrazeneca's vaccine remaining, but said it is buying more than 30 million doses of the pfizer shot.
it is also in talks with russia to produce sputnik v, according to state media, and is working on a home-grown vaccine.
in nearby thailand, the government on saturday took exception to media reports in britain that labelled a new strain causing concern there as the "thai variant".
the strain was first detected in thailand in a 33-year-old egyptian traveller, uk health authorities said, but 109 cases have since been found in britain.
"principally speaking, it should not be called the thai variant because the infected person is from overseas," said opas kankawinpong, head of thailand's disease control department.
— afp © 2006 2021 the online citizen© 2006 2021 the online citizen
singapore pregnant women and cancer patients on active treatment are among the sub-groups of individuals that can also be vaccinated, said the multi-ministry task force (mtf) in an update on monday (may 31).
it noted that more people have been vaccinated both globally and locally, which has provided more evidence on the efficacy and safety of vaccine use.
this is especially in relation to specific sub-groups where clinical trial data had not been as substantive.
the task force said: "the expert committee on covid-19 vaccination has been monitoring the evidence and developments around the world closely, and has revised the guidance for .
.
.
specific sub-groups of individuals.
"pregnant women will be able to register and book a vaccination appointment from june 4 onwards if they are part of the population group eligible for vaccination.
but mtf added that they should discuss the risks and benefits with their doctors to make an informed decision on the vaccination.
"there is currently no evidence to suggest that the pfizer-biontech or moderna covid-19 vaccines may cause harm to pregnant women or their babies," mtf said.
"however, the committee recognises that the amount of data collected on this population segment is still much smaller compared to data on the general population.
"[[nid:522094]]it added that it is also safe for women who are breastfeeding to be vaccinated and they do not have to suspend breastfeeding to receive the vaccine.
meanwhile, cancer patients on active treatment can also be vaccinated, mtf said.
but they should do so in a hospital setting, after assessment by their treating specialists on their suitability.
active treatment includes chemotherapy, immunotherapy or radiation therapy that individuals have undergone in the past three months or plan to undergo in the next two months.
under the current guidelines, cancer patients on hormonal therapy can continue to be vaccinated at any available vaccination site.
mtf said: "cancer patients on active cancer treatment remain a vulnerable population that is at an increased risk of complications from covid-19.
"there is currently no evidence of any safety signals or increased rates of adverse events from mrna-based covid-19 vaccines for this group.
"[[nid:513241]]the task force is also finalising guidelines on vaccination for cancer patients on treatment, including those who consult private specialists.
additionally, those with severe cutaneous adverse reactions can also receive the vaccine.
such reactions include the stevens-johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms, and drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome.
these people may go to the vaccination centres if they are part of the population group that is eligible.
mtf said the committee is also reviewing the safety data on persons with a history of anaphylaxis, to allow more to be safely vaccinated.
the review aims to be completed in the next two weeks and will set out guidelines.
"we will continue to review the data on other types of vaccines and explore bringing in safe and efficacious vaccines that are suitable for individuals not recommended to receive the mrna-based vaccines," mtf said.
this article was first published in the straits times.
permission required for reproduction.
singapore: a 32-year-old man has been arrested under the official secrets act (osa) for allegedly leaking information aboutcovid-19 measures for sport and physical activitiesto a whatsapp chat group.
the police said they received a report may 18 that information about the suspension of sport, physical activity classes and programmes catering to children and youth aged 18 years and below from may 19 until jun 13 had been leaked to the public.
this occurred before the information was officially released by sport singapore, the police said in a news release on sunday (may 30).
"preliminary investigations revealed that the man, who is a public servant and an authorised recipient of the safe management measures for sport and physical activities, had allegedly shared the information via whatsapp on may 16 with members of a private whatsapp chat group who were not authorised to receive the classified information," said the police.
the information was further disseminated by other members from the chat group, resulting in the wider circulation of the classified information before it was officially released.
since the start of the pandemic, at least six people have been charged under the osa for unauthorised or wrongful communication of information.
in may, ahousing and development board officerwas among two men charged over unauthorised communication of information about flat inspections.
kalayarasan karuppaya, a higher estate executive with hdb at the time of the offences, had allegedly leaked information on hdb's impending inspections of a flat at kim tian road to damandeep singh, a registered tenant of the unit.
kalayarasan was not authorised to communicate the information to damandeep, but allegedly did so on three occasions in may, august and september 2019. chua wee lin, who at the time held the position of deputy director at the national library board's property and facilities management department, was also charged in may with sending information about phase 2 reopening measures to a whatsapp chat group with 18 other members in it.
in april,a couple was chargedwith leaking an unreleased statement about school closures during the covid-19 "circuit breaker" last year.
noorain jubli, who was the personal assistant to the sfa director-general at the time of the offences, was charged with two counts of wrongful communication of information.
sfa suspended her from her duties in april 2020. her husband khairul annuar zakaria was also given two charges under the osa for wrongful communication and soliciting information.
that same month,zhao zheng, then deputy lead of moh's data management unit, was given more than 20 charges after she allegedly leaked the daily covid-19 case numbers before they were officially released to a private group chat on 22 occasions in 2020. those found guilty of wrongful communication of information under the osa face a fine of up to s$2,000 and up to two years' jail.
the police said unauthorised recipients should delete and not further circulate any confidential information received, as they may otherwise be similarly liable under the official secrets act.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
travellers leaving the provincial capital guangzhou must show negative covid-19 test results from the past 72 hours, starting from 10 p. m.  on monday, the city said/afpchinese authorities imposed fresh travel limits, cancelled flights and tested thousands of residents in guangdong monday after the indian variant of the coronavirus was reported in the country's most populous province.
travellers leaving guangzhou — the capital of the southern province home to 100 million people — must show negative covid-19 test results from the past 72 hours, starting from 10:00 pm on monday, the city said in an announcement late sunday.
guangzhou, an industrial hub of nearly 15 million people north of hong kong, reported 18 new local cases of the coronavirus on monday, causing alarm in a country that has largely brought domestic transmission under control.
guangzhou authorities have ordered residents of entire districts to be tested for the virus, while the nearby cities of foshan and shenzhen, which borders hong kong, have also launched mass testing after local cases were detected in the past week.
hundreds of flights out of guangzhou's baiyun international airport have been cancelled as of monday afternoon, according to aviation monitor variflight.
the patients in the current guangzhou outbreak were "all infected with the fast-spreading variant discovered in india," city health official chen bin said at a press conference on sunday.
a neighbourhood in guangzhou's central liwan district was locked down on saturday, with markets and schools shut and residents ordered to stay indoors.
high school students across the city, except for those in their final year of school, have also been ordered to stay home and take lessons online.
life in china has returned almost to normal since mid-2020, with authorities responding to sporadic outbreaks with aggressive testing and localised quarantines.
travellers entering china from abroad must endure lengthy hotel quarantines, with major cities tightening quarantine rules in recent weeks over fears of overseas variants.
— afp © 2006 2021 the online citizen© 2006 2021 the online citizen

                    monday, 31 may 2021
                on friday, judge amanda woodcock sentenced jimmy lai to 14 months in jail.
aphong kong (reuters): beijing's office that oversees matters in hong kong has warned of threats made to a judge who sentenced media tycoon jimmy lai and other democracy activists for their roles in an unauthorised assembly on oct 1,2019. a representative for the hong kong and macau affairs office (hkmao) said the presiding judge had received threatening phone calls, which the office said would not be tolerated.
"this is a serious threat to the personal safety of judges, a flagrant challenge to the judicial system in hong kong and a gross violation of the rule of law and order in hong kong," xinhua quoted a statement by hkmao as saying late on sunday (may 30).
the statement followed one by hong kong's department of justice late on friday that said a judge had been intimidated, without providing details.
on friday, judge sentenced lai, an ardent critic of beijing, to 14 months in jail, and nine others to up to 18 months for their roles in the rally.
hong kong arrested more than 10,000 people over anti-government protests in 2019, and some of those cases are now making their way through the court system.
the unrest led beijing to impose a contentious national security law on its freest city in june 2020, and more than 100 people have been arrested under the law so far, including lai.
the law punishes what beijing broadly defines as secession, sedition, terrorism and collusion with foreign forces with up to life in jail.
forty-seven democracy activists charged with conspiracy to commit subversion are set to appear in court on monday, in a case that has drawn criticism from western governments and international rights groups.
hong kong returned to chinese rule in 1997 with a guarantee of a high degree of autonomy until 2047.  critics say authorities are chipping away at those freedoms, an assertion officials in hong kong and beijing reject.
tags / keywords:
hong kong
                                                                ,
                                                                                                jimmy lai
                                                                ,
                                                                                                judge
                                                                ,
                                                                                                amanda woodcock
                                                                ,
                                                                                                threat



report it to us.
thank you for your report!copyright © 1995-
            

 star media group berhad (10894d)best viewed on chrome browsers.
{{item['v1 header']}}
   {{item['v1 body']}}

  {{item['v2 header']}}

are you having urinary troubles?
by taking the survey, it is deemed that you consent to the termswe hope you enjoy this feature!
it is 3pm, and the perfect time for a spot of tea.
or in the words of 54-year-old gurdip singh, "oi, it's time to yum cha!"
yum cha directly translates to drinking tea in cantonese.
the singapore-based worker who maintains and repairs ships for a living has become somewhat of a viral sensation in china recently for speaking fluent cantonese.
but it's not just his command of the language as a non-chinese in the short 15-second video clip that had people paying attention.
the passion in which he extolls viewers to take a break from work is palpable.
armed with a packet of tea, he bellows at the camera: "have some tea first, what are you working for?
""no use working so hard, your boss won't love you for it.
have some tea first, it's three-something!"
he adds, using a smattering of expletives for emphasis.
the video has spawned memes and copycat videos on chinese video-sharing platform bilibili, where the most popular clip has garnered more than three million views within a month.
most recently, singh showed off his cantonese-speaking prowess in a video interview conducted with local chinese broadsheet lianhe zaobao.
he explained that he'd picked up the dialect while growing up in kuantan, malaysia, where his neighbours and friends were all chinese.
the polyglot is able to speak some mandarin as well.
he is quick to state however, that his command of the language is "not good".
"but my cantonese is excellent, i'm not bluffing you, it's really good," joked singh.
the ship repairman told zaobao that he had been living in singapore since he was 16, moving here to find work.
he had also spent several years working in russia before returning to singapore.
singh expressed surprise at the popularity of the video.
he told zaobao that the clip was recorded in march last year "pre-covid", but only went viral earlier this month.
it is not clear how the clip found itself onto the video-sharing platform and on social media, but he only realised people were watching when some fans came to see him at his office just last week.
"they brought a packet of tea for me, and told me that i'm famous in china," said singh.
one reason posited by netizens for the clip's virality in china is how it resonates with a generation of regular employees, especially migrant workers.
said one netizen in hong kong: "it speaks to the hearts of all salaried workers.
"with the recent media attention in china on the "toxic 996 work culture" as well as other societal pressures, it is evident that the video has struck a chord.
wrote one commenter: "those who don't get the video are not employees who have to do ot (overtime) and work hard.
those who do will feel that this foreign uncle actually cares about us.
"in the words of another netizen: "i feel unexpectedly touched.
i don't even care for myself as much as this stranger.
"with his newfound fame, singh has received offers of sponsorships and commercial partnerships, and has also been invited to set up a channel on the chinese video platform.
but before being known as "brother yum cha", singh said he used to have another nickname in singapore — "elvis".
"with my sideburns and style, people say i look like elvis presley," said singh, who often dresses like the iconic singer in a fitted long-sleeved shirt and leather boots whenever he is out shopping.
"a foreigner at changi airport called out 'elvis' when he saw me and even requested for a selfie," said singh proudly.
singh added in the interview that he enjoyed his holiday to hong kong with his ex-wife and children back in 2007, where he expectedly amazed locals with his cantonese.
"they were surprised and asked how long i'd been living in hong kong," said singh.
he hopes to have the opportunity to travel to china again in the future, and hollered for recommendations on where he should visit to "see pretty things", adding, "pretty girls, also can".
candicecai@asiaone.
com
kuala lumpur: the malaysian government said on sunday (may 30) that all malls will have to be shut, while 17 essential service sectors will be allowed to operate during the impending two-week "total lockdown".
these sectors include healthcare, telecommunications and media, food and beverage, utilities as well as banking.
the government will also allow companies under 12 manufacturing sectors to continue operating, such as food and drink manufacturing, medical devices, textiles for producing personal protection equipment as well as oil and gas.
they will need to operate at 60 per cent capacity.
in a press conference, senior minister ismail sabri yaakob said: "we hope the manufacturing sector will follow the government's orders, because we have given the condition that only 60 per cent could work.
""but i've read social media posts and found employers who forced their employees to exceed the 60 per cent capacity," he added.
mr ismail sabri said that employees could report such breaches to the human resource ministry and the police.
shopping malls will need to close, except supermarkets and premises dealing in food and beverage and basic necessities, the minister added.
only two people from each household would be allowed to go out to buy essentials or for medical services, with movement limited to a 10km radius.
a statement by the ministry of international trade and industry also said: "the manufacturing and manufacturing related services sectors that are allowed to operate is to ensure minimal disruption to the supply chain of critical parts, components and finished products.
""this is essential to support the continued operations of critical infrastructures and front-liners such as security, healthcare systems, information and communications and as well as ensure adequate supply of basic necessities for the rakyat (people).
"the sunday announcement came after the prime minister's office announced on friday that malaysia would beundergoing a "total lockdown" from jun 1 to jun 14. malaysia's covid-19 numbers have continued to surge, witha record 9,020 new casesand 98 deaths on saturday.
on sunday, there were6,999 new cases.
there are now more than 560,000 cases nationwide.
putrajaya has assured people that there would be sufficient food stocks to last throughout phase 1 of the total lockdown.
however, there have been reports of lines of people flocking to buy necessities and goods in anticipation of tuesday.
during the same press conference on sunday, health ministry director-general noor hisham abdullah warned that a daily increase of 1,000 to 2,000 new cases was not impossible, and that the high number of deaths, such as 98 fatalities recorded on saturday, might continue and even rise.
"the health ministry has warned that a situation might arise where doctors might have to make the difficult choice, to give priority for intensive-care unit (icu) beds to patients with higher recovery potential, than those with poor prognosis.
"​​​​​​​​​​​​​​dr noor hisham outlined five actions that the health ministry would take during the two-week lockdown, including allowing breathing space for healthcare personnel and hospitals to reassess their equipment and speeding up the vaccination process.
healthcare personnel would also do targeted screenings in the field using the rapid test kit-antigen (rtk-ag) detection method for covid-19, he said.
more vaccination centres planned, private clinics to administer jabsearlier on sunday, minister for science, technology and innovation khairy jamaluddin said in a press conference that more vaccination centres will be opened in the coming month to speed up the vaccination process.
the first among these will be five mega vaccination centres around the klang valley.
"three will be in selangor and two will be set up in kuala lumpur," he said, adding that the set up would begin on jun 7. mr khairy, who is also the coordinating minister for the covid-19 immunisation taskforce said 1,000 private general practitioner (gp) clinics will be joining the national covid-19 immunisation program by jun 30. he added that 500 of these clinics will begin administering vaccines starting jun 15.
"i estimate that gps and private hospital vaccination centres can contribute and administer 40,000 doses in a day, and 400,000 doses (in total) by jun 30" he said, adding that this would be subject to the supply of the vaccines.
explaining that there were currently 2,500 gp clinics registered under the immunisation program, mr khairy said the government will be paying the private practices to administer the vaccines.
besides that mr khairy also shared that malaysia will officially start rolling out drive-through vaccinations for the public after a successful pilot project in a university in kota baru, kelantan .
"we did it in universiti sains malaysia in kubang kerian and it was successful.
we will now allow other states to start this for the public too," said the minister.
prior to the total lockdown, the government had begun tightening restrictions under a nationwide movement control order, dubbed "mco 3.
0" which started on may 12 and will last until jun 7. among the restrictions under mco 3.
0include 80 per cent of public sector employees needing to work from home, and 40 per cent for the private sector.
businesses can only operate from 8am until 8pm daily.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
hong kong (reuters) beijing's office that oversees matters in hong kong has warned of threats made to a judge who sentenced media tycoon jimmy lai and other democracy activists for their roles in an unauthorised assembly on oct.  1, 2019. a representative for the hong kong and macau affairs office (hkmao) said the presiding judge had received threatening phone calls, which the office said would not be tolerated.
"this is a serious threat to the personal safety of judges, a flagrant challenge to the judicial system in hong kong and a gross violation of the rule of law and order in hong kong," xinhua quoted a statement by hkmao as saying late on sunday.
the statement followed one by hong kong's department of justice late on friday that said a judge had been intimidated, without providing details.
on friday, judge amanda woodcock sentenced lai, an ardent critic of beijing, to 14 months in jail, and nine others to up to 18 months for their roles in the rally.
hong kong arrested more than 10,000 people over anti-government protests in 2019, and some of those cases are now making their way through the court system.
the unrest led beijing to impose a contentious national security law on its freest city in june 2020, and more than 100 people have been arrested under the law so far, including lai.
the law punishes what beijing broadly defines as secession, sedition, terrorism and collusion with foreign forces with up to life in jail.
forty-seven democracy activists charged with conspiracy to commit subversion are set to appear in court on monday, in a case that has drawn criticism from western governments and international rights groups.
hong kong returned to chinese rule in 1997 with a guarantee of a high degree of autonomy until 2047.  critics say authorities are chipping away at those freedoms, an assertion officials in hong kong and beijing reject.
(reporting by anne marie roantree.
editing by gerry doyle)stay on top of the latest market trends and economic insights with axios markets.
subscribe for freepresident biden is considering naming two kennedys to represent him abroad: caroline kennedy is in line to be u. s.  ambassador to australia, and vicki kennedy is on his radar for western europe, people familiar with the matter tell axios.
why it matters: with jfk's daughter and the widow of sen.  ted kennedy, biden would be reaching outside of his pool of core campaign donors.
he'd also be putting a spotlight back on america's most famous political dynasty — and honoring a late friend and mentor.
flashback: biden, who shares the family's irish catholic heritage, delivered a eulogy in 2009 for ted, with whom he served in the senate for 36 years.
he has described kennedy as a "big brother," and felt a debt of gratitude for kennedy's defense of his honor amid the plagiarism controversy in biden's 1988 presidential bid.
details: vicki, an attorney at greenberg traurig and a gun control advocate, got to know biden through her husband.
caroline served as president obama's second ambassador to japan and is well versed in the issues in the asia-pacific region, where the ap first reported she could be heading.
the white house declined to comment.
people close to the process stressed that nothing is final until the white house sends a formal announcement.
driving the news: biden was scheduled to make several formal offers to candidates over the holiday weekend, ahead of announcing his first slate of ambassadors as soon as this week.
on friday, he announced rufus gifford as his choice to be chief of protocol at the state department.
administration officials have been vigorous in vetting the first group of political ambassadors, hoping to avoid negative headlines.
the intrigue: in addition to political allies like former chicago mayor rahm emanuel and l. a.  mayor eric garcetti, biden will likely reward longtime friends and aides, in lieu of several donors who raised millions of dollars over zoom from his campaign.
biden is planning to nominate cindy mccain as his envoy to the world food program in rome.
michael carpenter, managing director of the penn biden center for diplomacy and global engagement and a former career foreign service officer, is being considered for a european position.
some donors may make the cut:cynthia telles, a clinical professor of psychiatry and biobehavioral sciences at ucla, is being considered for costa rica.
she and her husband, joe waz, hosted a fundraiser for biden in 2019 along with hollywood luminaries jeffrey katzenberg and rob reiner.
scott miller, a former ubs wealth manager and lgbtq activist, has been discussed for switzerland.
he and his husband, tim gill, are prominent philanthropists for lgbtq causes.
more from axios: sign up to get the latest market trends with axios markets.
subscribe for freetwo suspects were arrested in germany and slovakia in raids monday on a group accused of smuggling vietnamese into germany and other european countries for large fees that they had to work off in massage parlors, brothels and other places, authorities said.
a vietnamese man is suspected of giving hormone injections to women who worked as prostitutes in germany to prevent them from getting unwanted pregnancies, prosecutors and police said in a statement.
police found 13 people who were in germany illegally during monday's raids in several parts of germany.
n1   09:00-13:00   91 | n2    10:00-14:00  716mitt romney's successful 2012 campaign could serve as a template for 2024 hopefulsseveral european nations want denmark to explain why its foreign secret service allegedly helped the united states spy on european leaders, including german chancellor angela merkel, more than seven years ago.
danish lawmaker karsten hoenge of the left-leaning socialist people's party, which is supporting denmark's social democratic government, said monday that he would quiz the scandinavian country's defense and justice ministers in parliament about the case.
two men followed a 64-year-old man into the lexington ave-59th street station around 5 a. m.  sunday.
smart,5%!$1,600,!the partner of lord ashcroft's son is in custody after a police officer was shot in belize.
jasmine hartin, the partner of andrew ashcroft, whose father is lord ashcroft – the former deputy chairman of the conservative party – was detained after police say she was found near where superintendent henry jemmott's body was discovered on friday.
mr jemmott, a father of five, was found floating in the sea next to a pier off the eastern coast of belize after being shot.
investigators said his police-issued firearm was found on the pier.
police say the pair were alone together before he died.
however, marie jemmott tzul, the officer's sister, told the telegraph they were not having an affair.
"there was no romantic relationship at all," she said.
mr jemmott's family claimed that the post-mortem examination had ruled out an accident or suicide.
but the police have not confirmed this claim and the results of the inquest are due to be released on monday.
in a packed, converted hangar in a suburb of strasbourg, eastern france, a thousand men kneeled on mats for friday prayers as an imam intoned in turkish.
outside, hundreds more were obliged to place rugs on the tarmac of a courtyard for want of space.
between their prostrate forms and mecca stood a football goal.
"we're lucky the sun is shining.
when it rains, i can tell you, it's not much fun.
this place is too small," said volkan duran, 49, vice president of eyyup sultan mosque.
a shelter in place has been issued for parts of deptford township, gloucester county.
the area impacted is pasadena avenue and hurffville road.
《!》ut,!west african regional bloc ecowas suspended mali's membership on sunday after the country's military overthrew its leaders last week the second such coup in just nine months.
the decision was made during an emergency summit held by leaders of the fifteen-member economic community of west african states in ghana's capital accra.
mali's neighbours, as well as international powers, fear the country's political instability could undermine a regional fight against islamist militants.
the country is a home base for regional affiliates of al qaeda and islamic state.
assimi goita, a malian army colonel who led the last coup in august, ordered the arrests of both the president and prime minister last monday.
the pair resigned while imprisoned and were later released.
goita was declared president on friday.
ecowas did not call for the new interim president to step down.
it also did not impose any new sanctions like they did last august.
instead, it said a new civilian prime minister should be nominated.
ghana's foreign minister, shirley botchway.
"one of the decisions of the heads of state is that they should ensure that in the next few days there is a civilian prime minister who will form a government, a transitional government for the rest of the period.
at the same time work with ecowas to ensure that the transition is on track towards the end goal, which is to return the people of mali to democratic rule.
"in a communique after their summit, the bloc said mali's plans to hold elections next february should be 'absolutely maintained'.
while goita attended the summit, he gave no immediate comment.
north korea's state media on monday slammed the termination of an agreement between the u. s and south korea that limited south korea's missile range.
north korea's official kcna news agency quoted an article written by described "international affairs critic," kim myong chol, accusing the u. s of "shameful double-dealing".
the pact limited the development of south korea's ballistic missile program to a range of 500 miles.
south korean president moon jae-in announced an end to that deal after his first summit with u. s.  president joe biden earlier this month.
kim criticized moon for welcoming the agreement's dissolution.
he said, "the termination is a stark reminder of the u. s. 's hostile policy toward the [democratic people's republic of korea] and its shameful double-dealing.
"he said pyongyang will counter the move.
sydney (reuters) -australian blogger yang hengjun, facing trial in beijing on espionage charges that he denies, asked the judge to exclude evidence obtained in interrogations where he says he was tortured, according to a message conveyed to family and friends.
in his first comments since thursday's court hearing, which was closed to family and australian consular officials because china says it involved state secrets, yang also expressed concern that geopolitical tensions may influence the outcome of his trial.
diplomatic ties between australia and china have deteriorated sharply since yang was detained in january 2019, with china imposing trade sanctions on some imports from australia and reacting angrily to its call for an international inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus.
here is what whole mouth dental implants should cost you in your areafollowing victor, hratch panossian, our chief financial officer, will review our operating results.
shawn beber, our chief risk officer, will close out the prepared remarks with a risk management update.
this memorial day weekend, amazon has got you covered with amazing deals and steals on its devices and gadgets.
you can even score discounts on the fire tv sticks and tablets, the ultimate entertainment must-have.
or you can protect your home on a budget with deals on ring alarm systems and bundles.
at least 34 candidates have been murdered since campaigning began in april, with the assassination clear-up rate close to zero friends and family mourn during the wake of mayoral candidate alma barragan.
she was killed while campaigning for the mayorship of the city of moroleon, in violence-plagued guanajuato state.
photograph: armando solis/ap tuesday started off like any other day on the campaign trail for josé alberto alonso, a union leader running for mayor in the mexican beach resort of acapulco: he kissed his family goodbye, boarded his nissan extreme suv and headed off to start knocking on doors.
but barely 200m from his home, a motorcycle closed in and the pillion passenger pulled a handgun, peppering the car with bullets.
alonso's bodyguard returned fire, and the attackers fled.
the candidate had escaped injury, but was later sent to hospital suffering from stress.
"when you get into politics, you know there could be repercussions, but never to this degree" said alonso, 36, from his sickbed.
the fuerza por mexico candidate for mayor of acapulco, jose alberto alonso gutierrez, speaks from the hospital where he is recovering from the attack.
photograph: david guzmán/epa mexico has suffered an especially bloody and violent campaign season ahead of midterm elections on 6 june when the country will renew its 500-seat lower house of congress, pick governors in 15 of its 32 states and elect hundreds of mayors and local legislators.
at least 34 candidates have been murdered since campaigning started on 6 april, while dozens more have been targeted and attacked.
mexican authorities have logged 398 threats or attacks on candidates.
much of the violence occurs in states like guerrero, south of mexico city, where numerous crime factions battle over the opium poppy trade and run extortion rackets and kidnapping rings in acapulco.
few cases are ever solved, though the federal government has been providing protection to candidates in rough corners of the country.
forensic investigators work at a scene where assailants left a package and a threat message taped to the gate of the house of leticia castillo, a candidate of the social encounter party (pes) in ciudad juárez earlier this month.
photograph: josé luis gonzález/reuters "criminal groups have learned their lesson over the past few years that no matter what they do – including killing candidates or attacking public institutions – there are no consequences," said falko ernst, senior mexico analyst for the international crisis group.
"if we look at the performance of mexican judicial institutions in actually solving the murders of politicians, it's pretty much zero.
that creates huge incentives to kill candidates and get away with it. "
many of the attacks target candidates for local government as criminal groups seek to increase their territorial control.
"the point of gaining control over the next mayor is to assure that this mayor guarantees access to two prize resources: public money and the police," said gema kloppe-santamaría, a mexican crime investigator at loyola university chicago.
campaigning has been suspended in dozens of municipalities around the country due to violence.
the ruling morena party stopped campaigning in the southern part of the state of mexico – the country's most populous region, which wraps around mexico city – after an ambush in march killed 13 state and federal police officers.
morena's party president mario delgado tweeted on friday that he and two other politicians were intercepted by gunmen with assault weapons in the state of tamaulipas, a hotbed of organised crime, but released unharmed.
"there are some municipalities where you campaign, but can't talk about municipal matters, others where you can bring in a campaign team, but can't hold rallies," said isaac monroy, the morena delegate in state of mexico.
the attacks have been brazen.
earlier in may, a former state prosecutor was gunned down on a street while campaigning for mayor in northern sonora.
on tuesday, alma barragán was killed while holding a rally in the conflict-riven state of guanajuato.
president andrés manuel lópez obrador says his government is providing protection for candidates.
but he also accused the media of sensationalising the murders to make his government look bad.
criminal groups often offer public servants the choice of "silver or lead" – take their bribes or face death.
"there's a lot of blackmail, and those who say no end up like this," said ramón bernal garcía, a former detective running with the small fuerza por méxico party near mexico city.
some violence and intimidation is also down to rival political parties, bernal said.
a bodyguard for institutional revolutionary party mayoral candidate guillermo valencia takes his assault rifle from the back of the armoured suv they travel in, during one of valencia's campaign stops in morelia, michoacan state.
photograph: marco ugarte/ap alonso never received any threats, although he says in retrospect there were signs of trouble.
campaign signs bearing his boyish face were stolen and vandalised.
some campaign staff received veiled warnings to stop their work.
he was still unable to say what motivated the assassination attempt – especially as fuerza por méxico, the party he helped found, is contesting its first election and polling in the low single digits nationally.
but he said he was determined to stay in the race.
"i've received a lot of kind messages from people who are fed up with crime," he said.
"it hit me today because i'm a candidate, but i'll be a spokesman for all those suffering violence here in acapulco.
"play for just 1 minute to find out why everyone loves this game!
no install requiredbradley beal (washington wizards) with a 2-pointer vs the philadelphia 76ers, 05/29/2021the discovery of a mass grave containing the remains of 215 children is a stark reminder of the dark history of native american boarding schools.
folsom lake water levels low on memorial day weekend,.
!ambitious republicans are flocking to steve bannon's podcast for the chance to demonstrate loyalty to trump and audition for the former president's support.
the widely-monitored national security case of 47 hong kong opposition figures charged with conspiracy to commit subversion, most of whom have been in custody for the past three months, will resume on july 8, a judge ruled on monday.
defendants will receive evidence against them before june 28 and they can make a plea at their next appearance in the west kowloon court.
the case may then be moved to the high court, which has the power to give longer sentences.
witnesses describe items falling off shelves
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
taiwanese actor kai ko has said that he wanted to marry singer elva hsiao, but that he liked singer tia lee the most.
in an instagram live broadcast last friday, he was asked by singer jumi wang in a game of truth or dare?
which former girlfriend he had loved the most.
ko, 29, laughed and joked that his agency would "kill" him.
he then said he had loved all of his former girlfriends.
"the one whom i wanted to marry was miss hsiao," he said.
"but up till now, the one i liked most was miss lee.
"he said they broke up because he was "not good enough", without elaborating.
lee, 36, was once known as "little vivian hsu" for her likeness to the singer.
the former member of now-defunct girl group dream girls has since focused on her career in china.
her manager told the media that she declined to comment on ko's disclosure.
hsiao, 41, who released her debut mandopop album in 1999, said that ko was just being frank.
she is currently dating budding actor justin huang, who is 16 years her junior.
ko has been linked to several female celebrities since he shot to fame in his debut movie, you are the apple of my eye (2011).
the film is based on director giddens ko's semi-autobiographical novel of the same name.
kai ko admitted to dating hsiao in 2012 before they broke up in 2014.  she later said they broke up because they had different values and outlooks on life.
the actor was linked to lee between 2014 and 2017, a period which coincided with his career being derailed after his drug arrest in beijing in august 2014. he served two weeks in detention, while hong kong actor jaycee chan was sentenced to six months' jail for sheltering drug users.
lee did not distance herself from ko then and even provided encouragement to him.
other celebrities romantically linked to the actor include late tycoon stanley ho's daughter laurinda ho, south korean model irene kim and fashion boutique owner rigel davis.
ko has starred only in a handful of movies since his arrest.
they include myanmar-born taiwanese director midi z's the road to mandalay (2016) and a choo (2020), which was supposed to be released in 2014 but was delayed by his arrest.
the fantasy romance drama is based on another of giddens ko's novels.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
source: pritam singh / facebookthe workers' party (wp) chief and member of parliament (mp) for aljunied grc pritam singh took to his facebook on saturday (29 may) to address the many concerns from eunos residents regarding the recently-activated screening centre in their residential area.
in his post, mr singh shared that the former bedok north secondary school (bnss) site in eunos was set up as a regional screening centre under the charge of the health promotion board (hpb) about two weeks ago.
"apart from carrying out daily swabbing, after 1pm, the centre is reserved to cater for vehicles conveying persons under quarantine.
at another end of the centre, an area has been set aside to test individuals displaying symptoms of ari (acute respiratory infection)," he wrote.
according to mr singh, the activation of the screening centre has affected residents living at jalan damai in the eunos ward of aljunied grc, in particular those at blk 662-664. he noted that the hdb service roads near their blocks have been congested with vehicles, workers, etc.
while enforcement operations have been conducted against errant drivers, he stated that they were opportunistic and sporadic.
mr singh added that there is also the concern of many workers walking to and from the screening centre through the void decks of their blocks.
"i have visited the screening centre a few times now to talk with hpb officers and to see how the problem can be alleviated," he shared.
during his visit, mr singh fortuitously stumbled upon an acquaintance from his national service days, mr chin, who apparently is part of the hpb team in charge of all the seven screening centres in the eastern part of singapore.
"in view of the feedback, small lorries have been diverted into the screening centre to park after embarking/disembarking workers from today.
"hpb is also looking to deploy more traffic marshalls to better control traffic while maintaining safety considerations for users of the screening centre, and in doing so, reducing the prospect of congestion and illegal parking at blk 662-664," he elaborated.
mr singh added that the hpb team is also looking at alternative parking options within the bnss site which require some site preparation, so as to contain activities within the screening centre as far as possible.
"to the residents of jalan damai, i know it has been a challenging two weeks so far, especially with many of you working from home," he acknowledged.
mr singh went on to ask for residents' understanding on the situation, while assuring that the hpb team are doing their best to reduce inconvenience to everyone.
"even so, do drop your feedback to me anytime at [email protected] and i will do my best and work with the agencies involved to make things better," he concluded.
© 2006 2021 the online citizen© 2006 2021 the online citizen
a morning walk with her baby at bedok reservoir ended on a sour note for a mum last tuesday (may 25).
the woman, an indian singaporean, told stomp that an elderly man approached her at around 8.
30am, asking why her son was not wearing a mask.
she explained that her baby was not required to wear a mask since he was seven months old, but the man allegedly told her "you indians don't follow the rules".
he also chided her: "when you indians come to singapore, follow singapore rules and not indian ones".
the elderly man then proceeded to take photos of her son without permission, and even continued to snap more pictures of them after she voiced concerns over his actions.
"he then continued his tirade about how my baby must wear a mask, after which i just left and returned home," she said.
concerned about photos of her child in the man's possession, the mum made a police report on the same day.
she added: "singapore is my country and home, and it saddens me to hear that some people believe otherwise.
"we are all in this together and i hope sharing my experience will remind everyone that there is no room for racism in singapore.
"the police confirmed with asiaone that a report was lodged and added that they're looking into the incident.
as singapore sees a rise in community covid-19 cases in recent weeks, there have been more reports of racist incidents here.
[[nid:528681]]in a viral video, a 47-year-old man was seen confronting an indian family at pasir ris beach park on may 2, telling them not to "come and spread the virus".
that same week, a 30-year-old man was said to have used a racial slur and kicked an indian singaporean woman on the chest for not wearing a mask while she was brisk walking in choa chu kang.
the men are under police investigation for offences such as public nuisance, wounding the racial feelings of others, and voluntarily causing hurt.
on may 10, prime minister lee hsien loong said in a facebook post: "i understand people being under stress because of covid-19, and anxious about their jobs and families.
"but that does not justify racist attitudes and actions, much less physically abusing and assaulting someone because she belongs to a particular race, in this case, indian.
"under current covid-19 regulations in singapore, mask-wearing for children under two is not recommended for safety reasons.
meanwhile, those engaging in strenuous exercises such as jogging and brisk walking are allowed to take off their masks.
lamminlee@asiaone.
com
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore there were 23 new coronavirus cases confirmed as at noon on monday (may 31), taking singapore's total to 62,051. monday's figure comprised 16 community cases, said the ministry of health (moh).
of these, three are currently unlinked.
of the 13 linked cases, 11 had already been placed under quarantine, while two were detected through surveillance, said moh.
there were also seven imported cases who had been placed on stay-home notice on arrival in singapore.
four of the imported cases are singaporeans or permanent residents.
no new cases from within workers' dormitories were reported.
more details will be announced on monday night.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
australian and new zealand prime ministers talk up closeness of ties as ardern is forced to defend 'soft' stance on beijing last modified on mon 31 may 2021 07.
18 bstthe australian prime minister, scott morrison, has warned that "there are those far from here that would seek to divide us", during a press conference with his new zealand counterpart, jacinda ardern, that focused on how the two countries handle china.
the leaders emphasised unity in the face of beijing's increasing regional influence and morrison said any forces trying to scupper the partnership would not succeed.
the question of how to respond to the rise of china – and perceived differences in the two countries' approaches – dominated both prime ministers' comments at their first in-person talks since the pandemic began.
talking to the press in queenstown, new zealand, on monday, ardern and morrison sought to present a united front on china and international trade and security issues.
"i have no doubt there will be those who seek to undermine australia and new zealand's security by trying to create points of difference that are not there," morrison said.
he said the "direct personal relationship" between him and ardern "will only continue, because we have common challenges.
there are common threats.
"while the initial comments on "those who seek to divide" were made in response to questions on china, morrison would not comment on whether he was referring to the country directly.
"people always try to divide new zealand, all over the place," he said.
ardern was forced to defend new zealand's position, which has been characterised in the australian press as soft or cosying up to beijing.
"[i] directly and strongly refute the assertion that nz is doing anything other than taking a very principled position on human rights issues, on trade issues as they relate to china," she said.
"at no point in our discussions today did i detect any difference in our relative positions on the importance of maintaining a very strong and principled perspective"morrison answered with a straight "no" when asked if new zealand had 'sold its soul' to china.
"australia and new zealand are trading nations, but neither of us would ever trade our sovereignty or our values," he said.
ardern said the two countries had "broadly been positioned in exactly the same place" on major human rights and trade policy statements.
new zealand has joined australia on a number of key statements raising concerns about china's conduct in hong kong and xinjiang – but its stance has been interpreted as softer across the tasman.
in april, the foreign minister, nanaia mahuta, said new zealand was "uncomfortable" expanding its invocation of the five eyes alliance with australia, canada, the uk and the us beyond intelligence matters, into wider policy statements.
that stance has led some to call new zealand the "weak link" of the alliance.
but ardern shot down the proposition that new zealand's standing in the five eyes network could be downgraded.
"the answer to that question is no," she said.
"we carry responsibility for ourselves to ensure adequate investment in our defence forces and equally, that we carry our weight as a member of the intelligence and security community.
"referring to the two allies' strong historic relationship, morrison said the two nations had carved out "a uniquely anzac path through covid-19" and "must also continue to pursue an anzac path through the other issues".
morrison had opened talks with brief comments referencing regional pressures created by china.
"the broader issue of the indo-pacific and a free and open indo-pacific is something that australia and new zealand feels very strongly about," he said.
"all of us have a big stake in ensuring a world that favours freedom and a free and open indo-pacific.
"the indo-pacific includes the hotly contested south china sea, where china has been increasing its military presence and island-building – dumping sand on to small atolls to create larger islands that can host military bases.
the association of southeast asian nations has said those efforts "may undermine peace, security and stability" in the region.
the australian military is actively patrolling the south china sea, and in may, the new zealand defence minister, peeni henare, said the country's navy would be joining a british flotilla tour of the indo-pacific and south china sea later this year.
asked directly about the prospect of conflict with china over the south china sea or taiwan, morrison responded that "the world is being characterised by increased strategic competition between the united states and china", but that competition "doesn't need to lead to increased likelihood of conflict".
both australia and new zealand are highly dependent on china for trade.
china accounts for around 30% of new zealand's exports, and $33bn of total trade.
china is also australia's largest export market, but over the past year, that's been hurt by a deteriorating relationship between canberra and beijing in a trade war that cost australia an estimated $47.
7bn last year.
also on the table was new zealand's frustration at australia's "501" policy of deporting citizens who commit a crime – even if they have lived in australia for most of their lives.
the policy has been a simmering "sore point" between the two nations, mahuta has said.
at the last set of talks between the two leaders, ardern publicly rebuked morrison for the policy.
"do not deport your people and your problems," she said.
this year, ardern said she had once again made clear new zealand's position on the deportations.
the issue seems to be at a stalemate, with no movement from australia.
despite those disagreements, ardern also continued to emphasise the connections between the two nations, saying that "when we talk about australia and new zealand being family, being whānau [the māori word for extended family], we actually mean that quite literally as much as we mean it symbolically".
"as with any family, we will have our differences from time to time but those differences are still undertaken in the spirit of openness and ultimately friendship.
we are much bigger than our differences – the last year has taught us that," she said.
a joint statement released by the two leaders outlined the countries' shared positions, which included statements on xinjiang, hong kong, and "serious concern over developments in the south china sea, including the continued militarisation of disputed features and an intensification of destabilising activities at sea".
it also outlined a series of positions that, while not referencing china specifically, point to shared concerns over beijing's influence in the region.
they committed to supporting sovereign states in the indo-pacific, and said those countries must be able to "pursue their interests free from coercion".
they also cited shared commitments to "countering foreign interference".
both leaders "expressed concern over harmful economic coercion and agreed to work with partners to tackle security and economic challenges. "
on saturday, new zealand opted to join as a third party in australia's dispute with china over punitive tariffs on barley, as it goes to the wto.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore home seekers made a rush for the four-room build-to-order (bto) flats in telok blangah, contributing to one of the highest application rates in recent years.
this comes even as these flats are the most expensive units in the housing board's sales exercise this month.
located in the mature estate of bukit merah, there were only 70 such flats on offer in the telok blangah beacon project, yet they attracted 3,124 applicants as at 5pm on monday (may 31).
this means that only one in more than 28 first-time applicants will get a unit.
second-time applicants face even bleaker prospects, with more than 412 applicants vying for each available unit.
prices for these telok blangah four-room flats, which are located within walking distance of telok blangah mrt station, range from $602,000 to $710,000.
the last time a bto project drew such strong competition was in august last year, when 334 four-room flats in geylang drew almost 15 applicants for each unit.
the 105 three-room flats in telok blangah beacon were also oversubscribed, although competition was less stiff with slightly under three first-time applicants competing for each unit.
prices for these three-room flats range from $419,000 to $504,000.
buyers will also have to wait more than five years for these flats the longest wait in this launch as the project is estimated to be completed in the first quarter of 2027. before the covid-19 pandemic, the waiting time for a standard bto flat was about three to four years.
mr lee sze teck, director of research at huttons asia, said the project's central location in a mature estate is the key draw.
it is also the closest bto project that has been announced so far to the future greater southern waterfront, he added.
"even paying $710,000 and a wait of more than five years is no deterrent to buyers who desire the location and the potential upside of the transformation in years to come," he said.
the last time new flats were launched in bukit merah was eight years ago.
the other bto project in a mature estate in this month's sales exercise, which will conclude at 11.
59pm on monday, was also popular, although demand was less competitive.
the 1,010 four-room flats in macpherson weave in geylang attracted four first-time applicants for each unit.
the 156 three-room flats attracted fewer than two applicants for each.
in geylang, 1,382 two-room flexi, three-room and four-room flats are on offer at macpherson weave.
photo: hdb
in the non-mature estate of woodlands, the 359 five-room flats in woodgrove ascent were the most in demand, drawing close to four first-time applicants for each unit.
its 411 four-room and 84 three-room units also attracted more than three first-time applicants for each available unit.
prices start from $185,000 for a three-room flat, $275,000 for a four-room flat and $372,000 for a five-room unit, making them the most affordable in this sales exercise.
in woodlands, 1,540 two-room flexi, three-room, four-room and five-room flats are on offer at woodgrove ascent.
photo: hdb
similarly, the 251 five-room flats in garden bloom @ tengah had more than three first-time applicants each, while the 265 four-room units had three first-time applicants vying for each.
in both woodlands and tengah, buyers will have to wait for just under four years for the flats.
both projects are slated to be completed in the third quarter of 2025. 
tengah, singapore's newest town, has 782 two-room flexi, four-room and five-room flats in garden bloom @ tengah.
photo: hdb
propnex chief executive ismail gafoor said the overall rate of 4.
3 applicants to each available unit in this launch was down marginally from the 4.
6 seen in the february bto sales exercise.
"a potential reason for the slight moderation may be the increased uncertainty around completion dates and a longer waiting time for flats as a result of construction delays," he said.
however, ms christine sun, senior vice-president of research and analytics at orangetee & tie, noted that the overall application rate is considered healthy despite the government's warnings of construction delays due to covid-19.
"the rising prices of hdb resale flats and private properties may be a factor.
to many people, bto flats are still considered more affordable and worth the wait," she said.
in august, hdb will launch about 4,900 flats in queenstown, kallang/whampoa, tampines, jurong east and hougang.
another 3,100 to 3,600 units flats will be offered in choa chu kang, hougang, jurong west, kallang/whampoa and tengah in november, with exact site locations to be released in august.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
hong kong: beijing's office that oversees matters in hong kong has warned of threats made to a judge who sentenced media tycoon jimmy lai and other democracy activists for their roles in an unauthorised assembly on oct 1, 2019. a representative for the hong kong and macau affairs office (hkmao) said the presiding judge had received threatening phone calls, which the office said would not be tolerated.
"this is a serious threat to the personal safety of judges, a flagrant challenge to the judicial system in hong kong and a gross violation of the rule of law and order in hong kong," xinhua quoted a statement by hkmao as saying late on sunday (may 30).
the statement followed one by hong kong's department of justice late on friday that said a judge had been intimidated, without providing details.
on friday, judge amanda woodcock sentenced lai, an ardent critic of beijing, to14 months in jail, and nine others to up to 18 months for their roles in the rally.
hong kong arrested more than 10,000 people over anti-government protests in 2019, and some of those cases are now making their way through the court system.
the unrest led beijing to impose a contentious national security law on the city in june 2020, and more than 100 people have been arrested under the law so far, including lai.
the law punishes what beijing broadly defines as secession, sedition, terrorism and collusion with foreign forces with up to life in jail.
forty-seven democracy activistscharged with conspiracy to commit subversion are set to appear in court on monday, in a case that has drawn criticism from western governments and international rights groups.
hong kong returned to chinese rule in 1997 with a guarantee of a high degree of autonomy until 2047.  critics say authorities are chipping away at those freedoms, an assertion officials in hong kong and beijing reject.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
how they can help in wealth creationtomorrow is different.
let's reshape it todaylet's get smarter about money#toughertogetherhunt for the brightest engineers in indiamental health awareness initiativethe dynamic duo of a holistic self-caredownload the economic times news app to get daily market updates & live business news.
etprime stories of the day'can we neuter dogecoin?
': world's most expensive joke keeps getting funnier.
investors in on it?plastic money to internet banking to upi: dissecting india's digital-payments ecosystemflipkart's super 30: the untold story of how the walmart arm holds its stocks and sells them tootrending nowpopular categorieshot on webin case you missed itet verticalsmore from our networkother useful linksservicesfind this comment offensive?choose your reason below and click on the report button.
this will alert our moderators to take actionreason for reporting:your reason has been reported to the admin.
log in/connect with:will be displayedwill not be displayedwill be displayedstories you might be interested in
singapore: complaints against the travel industry topped the list of consumer woes amid the covid-19 pandemic last year, according to data released by the consumers association of singapore (case) on monday (may 31).
case received a total of 18,335 complaints across all industries last year, a 23 per cent jump from the 14,867 complaints the previous year.
the pandemic has "reshaped" the composition of consumer complaints, said the association, with about one in seven complaints last year related to it.
the biggest impact was felt in the travel and airline industries, with two out of five complaints in these industries stemming from covid-19 travel restrictions, said case.
travel businesses received a total of 1,800 complaints, more than three times the amount the previous year.
the airlines, medical consumables, clubs and hotels industries also saw sharp increases in complaints, said case.
reports against the beauty, motorcars and renovation contractors industries dropped slightly due to pandemic restrictions, but these remain priority areas, it added.
with more people turning to online shopping and digital transactions last year, the number of complaints related to online purchases jumped 95 per cent to reach 4,366 last year, added case.
the most common e-commerce complaints were related to defective or non-conforming goods, and delayed deliveries or missing products, it said.
travel and flight bookingsthe travel and airline industries received about 50 per cent of all pandemic-related complaints, said case.
people who cancelled or postponed tour packages, flights or hotel bookings due to global travel restrictions complained that they were unable to get back their deposits or prepayments.
some were charged a penalty or administrative fee for postponing their trips, while others were given travel vouchers to be used at a later date instead of a cash refund.
case said it assisted affected consumers by leveraging the covid-19 (temporary measures) act 2020, which provides them with temporary relief from contractual obligations to be performed on or after feb 1, 2020, for contracts entered into or renewed before mar 25, 2020. for disputes with travel agents and hotels that case could not resolve, it guided consumers to file cases with an assessor from the ministry of law, also provided for under the act.
the association said it approached airlines that received a higher number of complaints to urge them to offer flexibility in the use of travel vouchers, and the right of reimbursement if travel vouchers are not used.
case said it also engaged two local travel associations to urge their members to offer consumers a full refund for prepayments made for tour packages.
in total, case helped consumers recover more than s$300,000 in prepayments from airlines, travel agencies and travel portals, it added.
gym membershipsgyms and fitness studios received 356 complaints last year – a 91 per cent increase over the previous year – amid covid-19 restrictions on these businesses.
people with prepaid memberships sought case's help to obtain an extension or partial refund as they were unable to use the facilities when gyms and fitness studios shut for a few months last year, said the association.
gyms and fitness studios were not allowed to operate from april to june last year, during the "circuit breaker" and phase 1 of reopening.
consumers also found it difficult to book their preferred exercise slots due to capacity reduction in line with safe distancing measures, and sought a full or partial refund on their memberships, said case.
event bookingsthe bridal, hotels and restaurants industries received 169 pandemic-related complaints last year.
many people who were unable or did not wish to proceed with event bookings due to the circuit breaker and phased reopening measures faced difficulty getting back their deposits, said case.
some bridal salons and hotels were only willing to postpone the date of the event or cited clauses claiming that bookings made are non-refundable, added the association.
case said consumers recovered more than s$97,000 worth of prepayments from their event contracts with its assistance.
face masksthe medical and medical consumables industry received 1,256 complaints last year, of which at least 813 were in relation to medical consumables.
consumers generally complained about the pricing of face masks, hand sanitisers and other related consumables, said case.
some consumers also said they were misled about the quality or efficacy of face and surgical masks.
case said it worked closely with the ministry of trade and industry and competition and consumer commission of singapore to monitor and flag profiteering behaviour and unfair practices.
beauty and carscomplaints against the beauty industry and motorcars industry dropped to 1,363 and 1,180 respectively last year.
this was likely due to the closure of non-essential businesses during the circuit breaker, said case.
about one-third of complaints lodged against beauty businesses were related to unfair practices such as aggressive sales tactics.
some consumers complained that they were led to believe they were paying promotional prices for beauty treatments, but were subsequently pressured to purchase higher-end treatments at higher prices, said case.
responding to complaints, case signed voluntary compliance agreements with three beauty salons that committed to cease unfair practices.
in the motorcars industry, about 36 per cent of complaints were related to defective vehicles.
they generally involved consumers discovering defects in the car after purchase and seeking recourse from the dealers to no avail.
case said it rolled out an online campaign encouraging consumers to send their pre-owned vehicles for independent evaluation before making a purchase, and to educate consumers on their recourse under the lemon law.
of the total complaints received across all industries last year, consumers were given advice on how to follow up directly with businesses in 87.
4 per cent of instances, said case.
the remaining 12.
6 per cent were filed with case, and involved the association negotiating or mediating with the businesses on behalf of consumers.
about 70 per cent of filed cases were resolved, with nearly s$2.
8 million in cash and in kind recovered for consumers.
with covid-19 drastically changing the consumer landscape, case will "strive to be relevant and respond to the needs of consumers on the ground in these challenging times", said case president lim biow chuan.
"given the shift in consumer shopping behaviour, case will continue to do more to educate consumers on how to protect themselves should purchases go awry.
"it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
kuala lumpur: malaysian prime minister muhyiddin yassin unveiled a new economic stimulus package worth rm40 billion (us$9.
7 billion) on monday (may 31), in an attempt to mitigate the impacts of an impending total lockdown.
speaking during a televised national address, mr muhyiddin said the package – named strategic programme to empower the people and economy (pemerkasa) plus – will aim to increase the capacity of public hospitals to treat covid-19 patients, to support continuity of businesses and to help the people.
he said that rm450 million will be used to increase the capacity of beds in intensive care units and equipment for covid-19 treatment, while rm550 million will be allocated to cover the expenses related to increased operating and management costs in dealing with the health crisis.
on extending help to malaysians directly, he said rm2.
1 billion will be distributed to lower-income households earning less than rm5,000 per month.
"this is mainly to ensure the well-being and survival of the vulnerable, as well as to ensure that workers who depend on daily wages can continue to be assisted.
they are expected to be among the most affected following the enforcement of the lockdown," said mr muhyiddin.
in addition, he said that an optional loan moratorium would be offered to the bottom 40 per cent group and people who have lost their jobs, as well as micro-entrepreneurs and small and medium enterprises (smes) which are not able to operate during the mco.
he also announced a rm500 one-off special cash aid for 17,000 tour guides, 40,000 taxi drivers, 11,000 school bus drivers, 4,000 express bus drivers as well as 62,000 e-hailing drivers.
the financial aid, totaling rm68 million, would be transferred to registered recipients in july.
however, mr muhyiddin acknowledged that the government has limited finances to spare at the moment.
"i would like to be frank, the government has limited fiscal power to spend at this time.
however for the sake of the people's welfare, the government will strive to find a balance between lives and livelihoods .
.
.
to enable people to survive for the duration of this mco (movement control order)," said mr muhyiddin.
in concluding his speech, mr muhyiddin added that ministers and deputy ministers will not be drawing salaries from june to august, as a show of support for the country's fight against covid-19.
"the salaries will be channelled to the country's disaster trust account to fund covid-19 related expenses," he said.
prior to monday's announcement, putrajaya had rolled out six stimulus packages worth a total of rm340 billion.
malaysia is grappling to curb the recent rise in covid-19 cases.
the country enters a two-week lockdown from tuesday, during which malls will be shut whileonly 17 essential service sectorswill be allowed to operate.
these sectors include healthcare, telecommunications and media, food and beverage, utilities as well as banking.
on saturday, malaysia reported 9,020 new covid-19 cases, its highest daily toll since the start of the pandemic.
it was the fifth straight day of record new infections.
on monday, there were 6,425 new cases.
there are now more than 570,000 cases nationwide.
a total of 2,796 people have died from covid-19 in malaysia.
in a may 23 interview, mr muhyiddin said that while a full lockdown would guarantee people's safety, there isa risk that the economy could collapse.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore pilots of large-scale covid-19 tests in places like student hostels and malls will be rolled out here progressively, as singapore ramps up its testing regime to prevent the spread of the disease.
antigen rapid tests (art), which return results in about 30 minutes and are used heavily for pre-event testing, are also being piloted for use in regular surveillance testing programmes for workers in dormitories, construction sites, airport and selected marine shipyards.
this is in addition to the polymerase chain reaction-based rostered routine testing that these workers continue to be required to take.
the ministry of health (moh) said that it will be extending the use of arts further, with pilots in student hostels in autonomous universities.
it will also work with capitaland to run pilots at one or two selected malls for tenants and people who work there.
while less accurate than the polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test in diagnosing covid-19 patients, arts are cheaper, faster and more convenient to administer.
this makes them "more practical for frequent use, and very effective surveillance tests", said moh in a statement on monday (may 31).
"this will enable us to expand the scale of testing in the wider population, allowing us to identify potential infections earlier and to trigger public health actions sooner to stem further spread," the ministry added.
"all workplaces and employers are encouraged to adopt regular testing using such alternative tests to keep their staff and customers safe," said moh.
it said people who test positive on their art will need to take a pcr test at a swab and send home public health preparedness clinic or regional screening centre to confirm if they have covid-19.
they are required to self-isolate until they receive a negative pcr test result, the ministry added.
in a live national address on monday, prime minister lee hsien loong said that testing for covid-19 will not just be for potential new cases, it will become routine.
he also said that in order to isolate and ring-fence coronavirus cases and their contacts promptly before the virus spreads further, "we must test faster, and more liberally and extensively".
read next: 6 key announcements from pm lee hsien loong's address on covid-19 plansjoin st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
a new requirement that singapore citizens and permanent residents (prs) must test negative for covid-19 before being allowed to return home from high-risk places kicked in yesterday.
mr fin chua, 30, who has been living in thailand for eight years, feels that the new requirement is onerous as it is not easy getting a covid-19 polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test in bangkok .
he said a pcr test in the thai capital costs about 2,000 baht (s$85) at a government clinic and 4,000 baht at a government hospital, but it is hard for foreigners to get tested as thais get priority.
mr chua had planned to fly back to singapore this week to visit his father, who lives alone.
after hearing about the new requirement, the business owner considered moving his flight earlier so he could return before the measure took effect.
ultimately, mr chua did not do so.
instead, he moved his flight back by two weeks to mid-june, citing the lengthy 21-day stay-home notice he would have to serve if he came back home now.
the ministry of health (moh) said last wednesday that, from 11.
59pm on saturday, all singaporeans and prs returning to the country will have to present a valid negative covid-19 pcr test taken within 72 hours before their departure.
this is the first time moh has required singaporeans and prs to take a pre-departure test.
the ministry previously said it did not want to make it difficult for them to return home, should they be caught unprepared by rapidly deteriorating pandemic conditions abroad.
the immigration and checkpoints authority's (ica) safetravel website says those travelling by plane or by boat will have to present their test result at the air and sea checkpoints upon arrival in singapore.
those who have stayed in lower-risk areas, including australia, brunei, china, hong kong, macau and new zealand, for the last 21 days are exempted.
children aged six and below are also exempted.
at land checkpoints, only prs entering singapore will need to present a valid negative test result.
prs who arrive in singapore overland without a valid negative test result may be denied entry.
those who fail to comply with the new requirement may have their entry or re-entry permit cancelled.
travellers must be tested by an accredited or authorised health centre in the country or region of departure.
documentary proof is required and ica recommends travellers ask for a copy of the pcr test report that is in english or has an english translation, contains the traveller's name, date of birth and passport number, and shows the date and result of the test.
ms cheryl wong, 30, who works in the film industry in new york, said she did not mind the new requirement as getting tested for covid-19 in the us city is easy and there are free services.
"if i lived somewhere else with less testing options and undetermined turnaround times, i'd probably be more annoyed," added ms wong, who is returning home today to renew her united states work visa and to see her family after being away for 11/2 years.
she noted, though, that the new test requirement does not appear to take into account singaporeans or prs who have already been vaccinated, or that individuals may still test positive even though they may no longer be infectious.
she said: "i'm pretty sure i'll test negative because i'm fully vaccinated and i am still cautious.
but there is that little bit of a 'what if'.
"mr samuel phua, 23, who is coming home next month after graduating from the sibelius academy in finland, is also somewhat anxious about the pre-departure test.
"it is allergy season here, and pollen allergies and covid-19 have symptoms that are quite similar.
i got myself tested recently and my results were negative, but there's always that sliver of doubt and worry that the next one may be positive.
"but mr phua also said the new requirement is an important step towards ensuring the safety of singaporeans abroad and back home.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
wellington: new zealand and australia downplayed policy differences on china on monday (may 31), with prime minister jacinda ardern denying wellington was taking a soft stance on human rights to avoid offending its largest trading partner.
ardern's government has taken flak over its meek criticisms of china's rights record, while australia's more outspoken position has drawn punitive trade measures from beijing.
the centre-left new zealand leader insisted the trans-tasman allies were lock-step on attitudes towards china afterholding talks with her australian counterpart scott morrisonin the south island mountain retreat of queenstown.
the pair issued a joint statement expressing "deep concern" at the erosion of freedoms in hong kong and the treatment of the uyghur muslim minority in china's xinjiang province.
"you'll see that australia and new zealand have broadly been positioned in exactly the same place on these issues consistently," ardern told reporters.
"so i really push back on any suggestion that we are not taking a strong stance on these incredibly important issues.
"ardern and morrison also backed a push to further investigate the origins of the covid-19 pandemic, which remains a sensitive topic for china.
the new zealand government declined to sign a statement from the five eyes intelligence network last year condemning developments in hong kong, and this month insisted on removing the word "genocide" from a parliamentary motion about the plight of the uyghurs.
australia has fully backed the five eyes statements, sparking fiery rhetoric from beijing along with import levies on a range of australian products.
morrison said he did not believe new zealand was a weak link in the spy network, which also includes the united states, the united kingdom and canada.
"neither of us will ever trade our sovereignty or our values, we have stood side by side to defend those values," he said.
morrison said both australia and new zealand wanted a free and peaceful indo-pacific region and would work to ensure that goal was not threatened by rising china-us tensions.
"the world is being characterised by increased strategic competition between the united states and china, that is a self-evident fact," he said.
"i would say our shared view is that such strategic competition does not need to lead to increased likelihood of conflict.
"ardern also glossed over other irritants in the trans-tasman relationship, including canberra's policy of deporting new zealand-born criminals even if they have been in australia for most of their lives.
"as with any family, we will have our disagreements from time to time but.
.
.
we are much bigger than our differences," she said.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore, may 31 (ians): the b1617 covid-19 variant is spreading worldwide at 'frightening speed' and could aggravate the pandemic -- particularly in countries with low vaccination rates, according to the latest assessment of the virus by experts here.
the b1617 strain is becoming increasingly dominant worldwide and this will not be the last time that the virus mutates, the strait times reported on sunday.
"what is frightening is the speed at which this variant is able to spread and circulate widely within the community, often surpassing the capability of contact-tracing units to track and isolate exposed contacts to break the transmission chains, a professor teo yik ying, dean of the national university of singapore's (nus) saw swee hock school of public health, was quoted as saying.
"it has the potential to unleash a bigger pandemic storm than the world has previously seen," ying added.
b1617 has mutated to spread more easily from person to person and may dampen the protection conferred by vaccines as well as natural infection, though only slightly, experts say.
the variant, which was first detected in india in october 2020, is now present in more than 50 countries and is surpassing other strains causing infections, according to the world health organization (who).
earlier this month, the global health body declared it as a "variant of global concern".
the strain is 1.
5 times to two times more transmissible than the strain that first appeared in wuhan 18 months ago.
there are three versions of b1617 -- b16171, b16172 and b16173.
the second version is the most relevant as it has appeared to overtake b16171 in local cases as well as those reported globally.
the third version, b16173, is rare, the report said.
while it remains unclear if b1617 causes more serious illness or deaths, the best weapon remains widespread vaccination.
vaccinated individuals have a reduced chance of being infected, and a much lower likelihood of developing severe symptoms even if they are infected, teo said.
various researches have shown that the pfizer, moderna and astrazeneca vaccines are effective against b1617.
however, most countries, unfortunately, are lagging far behind in vaccinating their people as global inequity in vaccine supplies and distribution persists.
this means a higher chance of b1617 creeping into countries previously minimally affected by covid-19, professor dale fisher, chair of the who's global outbreak alert and response network, was quoted as saying.
"these countries, such as thailand, cambodia, laos and vietnam, are more vulnerable due to the low vaccination rates, leaving them more susceptible to severe disease," fisher said.
its like some one systematically eliminating people .
pharma mafiadisclaimer:please write your correct name and email address.
kindly do not post any personal, abusive, defamatory, infringing, obscene, indecent, discriminatory or unlawful or similar comments.
daijiworld.
com will not be responsible for any defamatory message posted under this article.
please note that sending false messages to insult, defame, intimidate, mislead or deceive people or to intentionally cause public disorder is punishable under law.
it is obligatory on daijiworld to provide the ip address and other details of senders of such comments, to the authority concerned upon request.
hence, sending offensive comments using daijiworld will be purely at your own risk, and in no way will daijiworld.
com be held responsible.
daijiworld residency,
                            airport road, bondel post,
                            mangalore 575 008
                            karnataka india
                            telephone : +91-824-2982023.
general enquiry: office@daijiworld.
com,
                            news & info : news@daijiworld.
com
                        
                            first floor,
                            divya deepa arcade,
                            
                            bendorewell,
                            
                            kankanady,
                            mangalore 575 002
                            karnataka india
                            
                            telephone : +91-824-4259372
                        
                            kishoo enterprises,
                            
                            3rd floor, mandavi trade centre,
                            kadiyali, udupi – 576 102
                            
                            telephone : 0091-820-4295571
                            
                            e-mail : udupi@daijiworld.
com
                        
                            daijiworld middle east fze,
                            p. o. box: 84772, dubai, uae
                            tel: 971-50-6597629
                            fax: 971-4-2639207
                            email: dubai@daijiworld.
com
                        
                        copyright &copy 2001 2021.  all rights reserved.
published by daijiworld media pvt ltd. , mangalore.
by ians  7h agoshare this article:singapore the b1617 covid-19 variant is spreading worldwide at 'frightening speed' and could aggravate the pandemic particularly in countries with low vaccination rates, according to the latest assessment of the virus by experts in singapore.
the b1617 strain is becoming increasingly dominant worldwide and this will not be the last time that the virus mutates, the strait times reported on sunday.
"what is frightening is the speed at which this variant is able to spread and circulate widely within the community, often surpassing the capability of contact-tracing units to track and isolate exposed contacts to break the transmission chains,a professor teo yik ying, dean of the national university of singapore's (nus) saw swee hock school of public health, was quoted as saying.
"it has the potential to unleash a bigger pandemic storm than the world has previously seen," ying added.
b1617 has mutated to spread more easily from person to person, and may dampen the protection conferred by vaccines as well as natural infection, though only slightly, experts say.
the variant, which was first detected in india in october 2020, is now present in more than 50 countries and is surpassing other strains causing infections, according to the world health organization (who).
earlier this month, the global health body declared it as a "variant of global concern".
the strain is 1.
5 times to two times more transmissible than the strain that first appeared in wuhan 18 months ago.
there are three versions of b1617 b16171, b16172 and b16173.
the second version is the most relevant as it has appeared to overtake b16171 in local cases as well as those reported globally.
the third version, b16173, is rare, the report said.
while it remains unclear if b1617 causes more serious illness or deaths, the best weapon remains widespread vaccination.
vaccinated individuals have a reduced chance of being infected, and a much lower likelihood of developing severe symptoms even if they are infected, teo said.
various researches have shown that the pfizer, moderna and astrazeneca vaccines are effective against b1617.
however, most countries, unfortunately, are lagging far behind in vaccinating their people as global inequity in vaccine supplies and distribution persists.
this means a higher chance of b1617 creeping into countries previously minimally affected by covid-19, professor dale fisher, chair of the who's global outbreak alert and response network, was quoted as saying.
"these countries, such as thailand, cambodia, laos and vietnam, are more vulnerable due to the low vaccination rates, leaving them more susceptible to severe disease," fisher said.
related video:share this article:sections on iolfollow iolmore on iollegaltrending on iolnewspapers© 2021 independent online and affiliated companies.
all rights reservedplease visit the official government information portal for coronavirus by clicking here
shanghai: china on monday (may 31) reported a sudden surge in covid-19 infections in the country's south, with 18 new local cases on may 30 in the city of guangzhou, causing a flurry of flight cancellations.
of the 27 new coronavirus cases reported by the national health authority in its daily updates, only seven infections were imported, with the remainder originating in guangdong province.
out of the 20 new locally confirmed patients on may 30, 18 were found in guangzhou city and two in foshan city, health authorities in guangdong province said on monday.
as of 11.
40am, a total of 519 flights at guangzhou baiyun international airport were cancelled, accounting for 37 per cent of total flights on monday, according to aviation data provider variflight.
guangzhou baiyun international airport, which carried 43.
8 million passengers last year, was the world's busiest airport in the midst of a global pandemic.
people leaving the city from airports, train stations and shuttle bus stations need to show proof of a negative covid-19 test within three days, unless they were transiting, the city said in a statement late on sunday.
on saturday, the guangzhou government ordered residents on five streets in the city's liwan district to remain at home and suspended non-essential activities, while entertainment venues and markets were closed.
recent infections in the city were contracted with a fast-spreading virus strain detected in india according to genome sequencing results, chen bin, deputy director at the city's municipal health commission, told a press conference on sunday.
china also reported 19 new asymptomatic infections, which china does not classify as confirmed cases, on may 30, compared with 22 a day earlier.
as of may 30, china had a total of 91,099 confirmed covid-19 cases, while its death toll remained unchanged at 4,636. downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore taiwanese actor kai ko has said that he wanted to marry singer elva hsiao, but that he liked singer tia lee the most.
in an instagram live broadcast on may 28, he was asked by singer jumi wang in a game of truth or dare?
which former girlfriend he had loved the most.
ko, 29, laughed and joked that his agency would "kill" him.
he then said he had loved all of his former girlfriends.
"the one whom i wanted to marry was miss hsiao," he said.
"but up till now, the one i liked most was miss lee.
"ko said they broke up because he was "not good enough", without elaborating.
lee, 36, was once known as "little vivian hsu" for her likeness to the singer.
the former member of now-defunct girl group dream girls has since focused on her career in china.
her manager told the media that she declined to comment on ko's disclosure.
hsiao, 41, who released her debut mandopop album in 1999, said that ko was just being frank.
she is currently dating budding actor justin huang, who is 16 years her junior.
ko has been linked to several female celebrities since he shot to fame in his debut movie, you are the apple of my eye (2011).
the film is based on director giddens ko's semi-autobiographical novel of the same name.
kai ko admitted to dating hsiao in 2012 before they broke up in 2014.  she later said that they broke up because they had different values and outlooks on life.
the actor was linked to lee between 2014 and 2017, a period which coincided with his career being derailed after his drug arrest in beijing in august 2014. ko served two weeks in detention, while hong kong actor jaycee chan was sentenced to six months' jail for sheltering drug users.
lee did not distance herself from ko and even provided encouragement to him then.
other celebrities romantically linked to the actor include late tycoon stanley ho's daughter laurinda ho, south korean model irene kim and fashion boutique owner rigel davis.
ko has starred only in a handful of movies since his arrest.
they include myanmar-born taiwanese director midi z's the road to mandalay (2016); and a choo (2020), which was supposed to be released in 2014 but was delayed by his arrest.
the fantasy romance drama is based on another of giddens ko's novels.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
taipei (reuters) taiwan is working hard to get the almost 20 million covid-19 vaccines it has ordered as soon as possible even in the face of global shortages, president tsai ing-wen said on monday (may 31), amid domestic pressure to speed up supplies even as infections fall.
taiwan is ramping up its vaccination campaign amid a spike in domestic infections after months of relative safety, but has so far given shots to fewer than 2 per cent of its more than 23 million people, though millions of additional doses are on their way.
in a live broadcast from the presidential office, ms tsai said with the pandemic remaining serious around the world, vaccine supplies had unable to keep up with demand, and all governments, including taiwan's, were working hard to get shots.
"all levels of government, including me, are keeping a close eye on the nearly 20 million vaccines ordered every day so they can be shipped as soon as possible and arrive earlier," she said.
the island reported 347 domestic covid-19 cases on monday, including 73 cases added to the totals for recent days, as it continues to readjust its infection numbers amid delays in reporting positive tests.
that marked the second consecutive day in which new cases were below 400, after a rare uptick in domestic cases concentrated in taipei and its nearby cities.
the increase, which peaked this month, prompted the government to tighten curbs, including banning in-restaurant dining and gatherings.
"the pandemic is heading towards a stage where it can be controlled," health minister chen shih-chung told a daily news briefing, saying new cases continued to decline.
mr chen said "aggressive measures" would remain in place for the one to two weeks, including fines for people not wearing face masks outside and a halt to wedding banquets and wakes.
he said more stations for rapid covid-19 tests would be set up in taiwan's outlying islands, where medical resources are relatively limited.
but the administration is facing pressure to speed up purchases, and has said local governments, companies and religious groups can buy them, though need to go through the central government for authorisation.
taiwan's cabinet said on monday that economy minister wang mei-hua would act as coordinator for requests from companies.
ms tsai said the government would work hard with those outside the government to get even more vaccines.
mr terry gou, the billionaire founder of major apple inc supplier foxconn, said on saturday his charity plans to apply to import five million doses of biontech se's covid-19 vaccine into taiwan.
biontech declined to comment.
taiwan has accused china, which claims the island as a breakaway province, of blocking a deal earlier this year for biontech shots, which beijing denies.
taiwan's parliament approved on monday an extra t$420 billion (s$20 billion) in stimulus spending to help the economy deal with the covid-19 pandemic.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
india has been witnessing an unprecedented surge in covid-19 cases, largely due to the new variants.
the variant found initially in the united kingdom (b.
1.
1.
7) was found in parts of north india earlier this year and began to spread across the country.
the world health organisation (who) recently declared the variant first found in india (b.
1.
617) as a variant of global concern as it has already spread to more than 40 countries.
this underscores the fact that no one is safe until everyone is safe.
it calls for globally coordinated efforts to build herd immunity through mass vaccination and to develop new vaccines or tweak the existing ones to become effective against the new variants.
experts have been doubtful about the effectiveness of some of the covid-19 vaccines against the new variants of the virus.
an immediate outcome of the second wave in india is that many people are no longer hesitant to take the vaccine.
however, vaccine shortages have been reported in many parts of the country.
several people have criticised the government's vaccine maitri policy.
the government has already imposed temporary restrictions on the export of covid-19 vaccines from india.
although there is a need for these temporary restrictions to meet domestic demand, any definite move towards vaccine nationalism will be detrimental to global efforts to contain the virus.
the pandemic needs to be checked globally in a coordinated manner.
if this is not done, the virus will keep mutating and no country will remain isolated.
only way to decrease variants of covid-19 is by increasing vaccination, says dr.  gagandeep kang
from may 1, all those aged 18 and above became eligible in india to receive the covid-19 vaccines.
this means that 595 million people who require 1,190 million doses were added to the 344 million people in the 45 and above age group requiring 688 million doses.
inoculating this huge population calls for massive production capacities.
only a little over 12% of the population has received one dose and 3.
2% has received both the doses in india so far.
the current production capacity of covishield and covaxin is just over 70 million doses per month.
the government has allocated ₹45 billion as an advance commitment to serum institute of india and bharat biotech for enhancing their production capacity.
by june-july, in the best-case scenario, the combined production capacity of the two companies is expected to rise to 158 million doses per month.
the 50 million imported sputnik doses will add to this.
this vaccine will be available only in major private hospitals for now.
it is reported that the sputnik vaccine will be produced in india from july with an annual capacity of 156 million doses, which, according to the russian ambassador to india, will be gradually increased to 850 million doses.
even if all the three vaccines are exclusively used for domestic supply, the anticipated production in the near future will not be sufficient to meet the enormous vaccine demand.
being the pharmacy of the world, india needs to rise to the occasion and cater to the demand for vaccines in the country as well as facilitate inoculation of the global population, especially in poorer countries.
in the first week of may, the indian council of medical research said it was willing to share the know-how to produce covaxin with any company interested in production.
allowing multiple producers will lead to more competition and a reduction in prices.
the government can easily task the public sector vaccine manufacturers with the production of covaxin by providing support to them.
in its attempt to enhance the production of covaxin from 12.
5 million doses to 58 million doses a month, the government of india has involved three public sector enterprises — haffkine biopharmaceutical corporation, bharat immunologicals and biologicals corporation limited, and indian immunologicals limited.
nobel laureate's claim on variants | experts seek to dispel vaccine fears
while raising an alarm on the spread of infectious diseases, a 2020 report of the who on the urgent health challenges for the next decade expressed concern on the lack of access to medical products, including medicines and vaccines.
as infectious diseases are expected to increase in the coming years, india needs to frame a long-term strategy to enhance supply at the domestic and international level.
public sector enterprises should be an integral part of that strategy.
unfortunately, the public sector enterprise policy, released in february, has not identified public sector enterprises in the pharmaceuticals sector as strategically important, and therefore, all central public sector enterprises will subsequently be privatised.
what we need now is the mass production of covid-19 vaccines for the mass vaccination of the global population in order for us to develop herd immunity against the virus.
india still has options left for scaling up production.
the national health profile 2019, published by the central bureau of health intelligence, ministry of health and family welfare, shows that india has an installed capacity of 8,151.
7 million doses of vaccines annually, in the private and public sectors.
a few of these facilities can be re-purposed for the production of covid-19 vaccines.
scaling up production of existing vaccines and producing new vaccines is not easy.
unavailability of raw materials, complexities in the transfer of technology, and intellectual property barriers all hinder production.
serum institute and bharat biotech have faced constraints in continuing production due to the lack of raw materials.
vaccination is our only weapon
intellectual property rights act as a major barrier in scaling up production.
about 1,800 patents cover the single-use plastic reactors which are used in the production of some of the covid-19 vaccines.
similarly, other equipment and materials used in the production of vaccines are patent-protected and therefore supplied by only a few players.
india and south africa had led an initiative at the world trade organization (wto) for the waiver of intellectual property rights over products required for treating covid-19.
recently, after coming under pressure, the u. s.  extended support to this proposal covering only vaccines.
however, germany said it is opposed to it.
therefore, it is unclear how this ip waiver proposal will help enhance the global production of vaccines.
besides, the u. s.  support, which is limited to vaccines, may also limit the benefits deriving from the intellectual property waiver, if the proposal comes through the wto.
an article published in nature points out the benefits of mrna vaccine technology compared to conventional vaccine technologies.
the key advantage of this technology is easy scalability in production.
at present, the who has approved two mrna covid-19 vaccines produced by pfizer-biontech and moderna, and those vaccines have proven to be more effective than other vaccines.
global cooperation is needed to create an environment where those companies interested in producing the mrna vaccines get open license from the innovators.
coronavirus | opeds and editorials
global cooperation is also required for the sequencing of the viral genome to track and control the multiple variants.
only if we tame the virus together and quickly will the world benefit both in terms of health and economy.
reji joseph is an associate professor at institute for studies in industrial development, new delhi; thankom arun is a professor of global development and accountability at the university of essex, u. k.  views are personal 




 our code of editorial valuesplease enter a valid email address.
printable version | may 31, 2021 8:46:22 pm | https://www.
thehindu.
com/opinion/op-ed/only-a-global-effort-can-tame-covid-19/article34683660.
ece

© thg publishing pvt ltd. 

to reassure indian muslims, the pm needs to state that the govt.
will not conduct an exercise like nrc
lisbon: all those who got up close to champions league celebrations in the city of porto should monitor for covid-19 symptoms and avoid close contact with others over the next 14 days, portugal's northern region health authority said on sunday (may 30).
in the few days leading up tosaturday's finalbetween chelsea and manchester city, big crowds of english fans, who were largely maskless and did not socially distance, took over porto's riverside area to drink and chant team slogans.
some 16,500 fans were allowed into the stadium, but many others travelled to porto to support their teams from the sidelines.
on saturday evening, ecstatic chelsea fans erupted with joy in porto's streets after their team clinched the title.
there has been concern in portugal that the event could lead to an increase in infections after authorities decided to relax covid-19 rules for the match, but also due to the highly contagious coronavirus variant spreading in parts of england after first being identified in india.
all fans had to present a negative covid-19 test on arrival.
portugal is on the british government's "green" list allowing tourists to visit the country without quarantining on their return.
in a statement, the regional health authority (ars norte) said that those who were in fan zones or around areas where celebrations took place should monitor for covid-19 symptoms, including fever, cough and loss of taste or smell.
it also said that people should try to "reduce contacts over the next 14 days" and strictly follow preventive measures, such as maintaining social distancing and wearing a mask.
the recommendations were made due to the high number of fans in porto who did not comply with covid-19 rules, ars norte said, adding that it would "keep monitoring the epidemiological situation" and adjust its response accordingly.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
taipei (reuters) taiwan has not given up hope of eventually getting covid-19 vaccines from germany's biontech, health minister chen shih-chung said on sunday (may 30), a deal that taipei has blamed china for not being able to complete.
after recording just a handful of daily infections for months, taiwan is dealing with relatively large numbers of community transmissions, though infection rates are starting to fall.
it has only vaccinated around 1 per cent of its more than 23 million people, but has almost 30 million shots on order, from astrazeneca, moderna and two domestic firms.
taiwan, which is regarded by china as a breakaway province, has blamed beijing for nixing a deal earlier in 2021 for biontech vaccines, which china denies.
mr chen told reporters that although talks for that shot had "somewhat hit the rocks", taiwan "has not completely given up hope" of obtaining them.
shanghai fosun pharmaceutical group has a contract with biontech to sell the vaccines in greater china, including to taiwan, but taiwan's government says it will only deal with germany's biontech directly and does not trust vaccines from china.
outside of greater china, biontech has partnered with pfizer.
mr chen said that, in late january, the covax vaccine-sharing scheme for lower-income countries had told taiwan it could get shots from pfizer, but covax informed the government on may 3 that would not be possible.
taiwan is under its second-highest level of curbs to stop the spread of infections, including limiting personal gatherings and closing entertainment venues.
mr chen said the task was to ensure those measures were being properly enforced, adding: "at present there are no plans or intentions for a lockdown. "
the government has come under fire from opposition parties for delays in testing and reporting positive cases, but mr chen said that was now improving.
taiwan reported 355 domestic covid-19 cases on sunday, down from 486 on saturday.
total daily cases peaked on may 17 and have been falling since friday.
taiwan has reported 8,160 infections since the pandemic began, including 110 deaths.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
beijing • china's southern metropolis of guangzhou has ordered residents in one of its neighbourhoods to stay home to contain an outbreak from becoming more widespread.
households in an area spanning five streets within the liwan district have been barred from leaving their homes except for selected family members to buy daily necessities, the city government said in a notice on its official wechat on saturday.
there was no mention of the length of the lockdown, or the number of people that were affected.
the authorities also ordered all schools in liwan, as well as some areas in several other guangzhou districts, to suspend most in-person lessons.
indoor stadiums, wholesale markets and entertainment facilities in the affected areas were also closed, while dine-in services were banned at restaurants.
guangzhou started taking measures to contain the spread since may 21, when confirmed cases and asymptomatic infections began showing up in the city, the government said in a separate notice.
it reported 12 local asymptomatic infections and four imported infections on saturday.
the city government has rushed to conduct mass testing and about 700,000 people had been tested by wednesday.
china has largely controlled the spread of the virus and has tightened quarantine rules after a surge in cases in neighbouring countries.
the mini-outbreak in guangzhou is believed to be linked to a 75-year-old woman who tested positive for the virus variant first identified in india, local health officials said.
the total number of confirmed infections in china to date stands at 91,061, with 4,636 deaths, according to the latest figures from the national health commission.
bloomberg, agence france-pressejoin st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
jerusalem (reuters) naftali bennett, israel's likely next prime minister, is a self-made tech millionaire who dreams of annexing most of the occupied west bank.
bennett has said that creation of a palestinian state would be suicide for israel, citing security reasons.
but the standard-bearer of israel's religious right and staunch supporter of jewish settlements said on sunday (may 30) he was joining forces with his political opponents to save the country from political disaster.
the son of american immigrants, bennett, 49, is a generation younger than 71-year-old prime minister benjamin netanyahu, israel's longest-serving leader.
a former commando, bennett named his eldest son after netanyahu's brother, yoni, who was killed in an israeli raid to free hijacked passengers at uganda's entebbe airport in 1976. bennett has had a long and often rocky relationship with netanyahu, working between 2006 and 2008 as a senior aide to the then-opposition leader before leaving on reported bad terms.
bennett stormed into national politics in 2013, revamping a pro-settler party and serving as minister of defence as well as of education and the economy in various netanyahu governments.
a former leader of yesha, the main settler movement in the west bank, bennett made annexation of parts of the territory that israel captured in a 1967 war a major feature of his political platform.
but as head of a so-called government of "change" that will include left-wing and centrist parties, while relying on support in parliament from arab legislators, following through on annexation would be politically unfeasible.
bennett said on sunday both the right and left would have to compromise on such ideological matters.
born in the israeli city of haifa to immigrants from san francisco, bennett is a modern-orthodox religious jew.
he lives with his wife, gilat, a dessert chef, and their four children in the affluent tel aviv suburb of raanana.
like netanyahu, bennett speaks fluent american-accented english and spent some of his childhood in north america, where his parents were on sabbatical.
while working in the high-tech sector, bennett studied law at jerusalem's hebrew university.
in 1999, he formed a start-up and then moved to new york, eventually selling his anti-fraud software company, cyota, to us security firm rsa for us$145 million in 2005. last year, as netanyahu's government sought to press ahead with west bank annexation and settlement building in the final months of the trump administration, bennett, then defence chief, said: "the building momentum in the country must not be stopped, even for a second.
"the annexation plan was eventually scrapped when israel formalised ties with the united arab emirates.
analysts see little chance of it being resurrected under donald trump's democratic successor, president joe biden, if ever.
nonetheless, palestinians are likely to regard bennett's elevation as a blow to hopes of a negotiated peace and an independent state, the long-standing diplomatic formula that biden favours.
after israel in march held its fourth election in two years bennett, who leads the far-right yamina party, said a fifth vote would be a national calamity and entered talks with the centre-left block that forms the main opposition to netanyahu.
an advocate of liberalising the economy, bennett has voiced support for cutting government red tape and taxes.
unlike some of his former allies on the religious right, bennett is comparatively liberal on issues such as gay rights and the relationship between religion and state in a country where orthodox rabbis wield strong influence.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore all residents of a housing board block in yishun have been asked to go for swab tests starting from tuesday (june 1) after cases of covid-19 infections have been detected there.
in a letter to residents seen by the straits times on monday, grassroots adviser to nee soon grc faishal ibrahim said this was a precautionary measure to ensure the safety and well-being of residents of block 745 yishun street 72. he added that residents living in surrounding blocks need not be tested unless they have visited households in block 745 between may 15 and may 24.
"nee soon town council has done a thorough cleaning and disinfection of the common area at block 745 and the surrounding blocks," he said.
on may 24, the 304 residents of block 559 pasir ris street 51 were asked to go for testing after four covid-19 cases were detected in two households there.
the ministry of health said on may 25 that all the tests had come back negative.
earlier, moh had identified 11 covid-19 cases from at least four households in block 506 hougang avenue 8.  two of these were detected from a mandatory testing exercise for residents.
a total of 405 residents and visitors of the block were tested on may 21 and may 22. responding to a question raised at monday's multi-ministry task force press conference, on the circumstances requiring all residents from a block to be tested, singapore's director of medical services kenneth mak said that when clusters in the domestic setting are picked up, the team will start by looking at the obvious chains of transmission and "the modes of transmission that are of concern".
"when we pick up several cases that occur within a fixed geographic vicinity, then we have to be concerned that there may also be chains of transmission that occur to other people that live in that same area," said associate professor mak.
"and this is the reason why we would then extend and carry out testing operations.
"these testing operations are also reinforced by looking at data from other testing modalities, such as wastewater testing.
screening wastewater samples could complement clinical testing and provide an additional indicator to assess the level of covid-19 spread within a community.
this is because infected individuals, including those who have mild symptoms or are asymptomatic could still be shedding the virus in their stool.
assoc prof mak noted that this may raise concerns as it could suggest that there are additional people who may be asymptomatic but are potentially infectious to others, creating a sense of urgency to launch testing operations at the respective housing blocks.
"so we look at each cluster on a case-by-case basis, looking at the circumstances and making that decision (on) whether we want to organise these testing operations," he said.
though such operations are not easy to carry out, assoc prof mak noted that they are necessary as part of singapore's aggressive testing to stay ahead of the curve and prevent further infections in the community.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
montreal: canada flew its flags at half-mast on sunday (may 30) in mourning for215 children whose remains were discoveredon the grounds of a former boarding school set up more than a century ago to assimilate indigenous peoples.
"to honour the 215 children whose lives were taken at the former kamloops residential school and all indigenous children who never made it home, the survivors, and their families, i have asked that the peace tower flag (in ottawa) and flags on all federal buildings be flown at half-mast," prime minister justin trudeau said on twitter.
several municipalities, including the economic metropolis toronto, announced they would also lower their flags.
the discovery of the children's remains, some as young as three, sparked strong emotions throughout canada, particularly in the indigenous communities.
a specialist used ground-penetrating radar to confirm the remains of the students who attended the school near kamloops, british columbia, the tk'emlups te secwepemc tribe said in a statement late thursday.
the kamloops indian residential school was the largest of 139 boarding schools set up in the late 19th century, with up to 500 students registered and attending at any one time.
it was operated by the catholic church on behalf of the canadian government from 1890 to 1969. some 150,000 indian, inuit and metis youngsters in total were forcibly enrolled in these schools, where students were physically and sexually abused by headmasters and teachers who stripped them of their culture and language.
today those experiences are blamed for a high incidence of poverty, alcoholism and domestic violence, as well as high suicide rates, in their communities.
ottawa formally apologised in 2008 for what the commission later termed a "cultural genocide" as part of a c$1.
9 billion (us$1.
6 billion) settlement with former students.
"i've said before that the residential schools was a genocide of our people.
here's just another glowing example of that genocide in practice: undocumented deaths of children," the national chief of the assembly of first nations, perry bellegarde, said sunday on the news channel ctv.
bellegarde noted there was still much work to be done to identify the remains, find their families and examine the sites of other residential schools.
he said the federal government "does have a responsibility to make sure that these resources are in place to get the answers.
"ceremonies to honor the young victims took place or were to take place throughout the country.
about 100 people gathered sunday in the mohawk community of kahnawake, near montreal.
participants placed children's shoes and toys on the steps of the saint francis xavier church as a tribute to the victims.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
vietnam has discovered a new covid-19 variant which spreads quickly by air and is a combination of the indian and british strains, health officials confirmed saturday.
the country is struggling to deal with fresh outbreaks across more than half of its territory, including industrial zones and big cities such as hanoi and ho chi minh city.
more than 6,800 cases including 47 deaths have been reported in vietnam, with the lion's share occurring since april.
"we have discovered a new hybrid variant from the indian and the uk strains," health minister nguyen thanh long told a national meeting on the pandemic saturday, according to state media.
"the characteristic of this strain is that it spreads quickly in the air.
the concentration of virus in the throat fluid increases rapidly and spreads very strongly to the surrounding environment.
"he did not specify the number of cases recorded with this new variant but said vietnam will soon announce the discovery in the world's map of genetic strains.
vietnam's central institute of hygiene and epidemiology said in a statement saturday that its scientists had detected gene mutations in four out of 32 patient samples through gene sequencing.
there were seven known coronavirus variants in vietnam before long's announcement, according to the ministry of health.
the communist country has previously received widespread applause for its aggressive pandemic response, with mass quarantines and strict contact tracing helping keep infection rates relatively low.
the new round of infections has made the public and government fearful and authorities have quickly moved to place strict limits on movement and business activity.
cafes, restaurants, hair salons and massage parlours as well as tourism and religious spots have been ordered to close in various areas of the country.
vietnam — a country of 97 million people — has vaccinated a little over a million citizens.
it is now ramping up its jab rollout and hopes to achieve herd immunity by the end of the year, according to the health minister.
authorities have called on people and businesses to donate money to help procure vaccines, while embassies and international organisations have been contacted for assistance, state media reported.
the country presently has close to two million doses of astrazeneca's vaccine remaining, but said it is buying more than 30 million doses of the pfizer shot.
it is also in talks with russia to produce sputnik v, according to state media, and is working on a home-grown vaccine.
in nearby thailand, the government on saturday took exception to media reports in britain that labelled a new strain causing concern there as the "thai variant".
the strain was first detected in thailand in a 33-year-old egyptian traveller, uk health authorities said, but 109 cases have since been found in britain.
"principally speaking, it should not be called the thai variant because the infected person is from overseas," said opas kankawinpong, head of thailand's disease control department.
read all the latest news, breaking news and coronavirus news heresri lanka launched a criminal probe on sunday into a massive container ship fire that has swamped the island nation's coast with plastic pollution in an unprecedented marine disaster.
tonnes of microplastic granules have inundated the south asian country's famed beaches, forcing a fishing ban and prompting fears of ecological damage.
the ministry of health (moh) on sunday (30 may) confirmed the detection of 25 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,028. n1   09:00-13:00   91 | n2    10:00-14:00  716british prime minister boris johnson married his fiancee carrie symonds in a "secret ceremony" on saturday, uk media reports said.
whilst the typical homeownership journey for most singaporeans is 'upgrading' from an hdb flat to a private property (e. g.   homeowners who need more space for their growing families might move from their smaller condo to a larger hdb flat.
on the other hand, an older couple may also choose to move into a smaller hdb flat once their children have moved out.
a 51-year-old woman recovering from a brain tumour died after consuming traditional chinese medicine (tcm) which likely caused her acute liver failure, the state coroner found.
《!》ut,!the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
singapore residents will soon be able to purchase "do-it-yourself" covid-19 tests over the counter at pharmacies, said prime minister lee hsien loong on monday (31 may).
from tuesday (1 june), 400,000 students from schools and ihls can register for the covid-19 vaccine.
$6,600「」,$100「」israeli and egyptian officials held talks in both countries sunday aimed at bolstering the cairo-brokered ceasefire that ended the latest deadly flare-up of violence between the jewish state and gaza's hamas rulers.
he risked everything to give his baby girl a second chance at life this article, cannabis can mean death in malaysia.
for one dad, it also meant life for his daughter.
, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
gavin macleod, a veteran supporting actor best known for his role as an ever-smiling cruise ship captain on the 1970s-80s sitcom "the love boat," died saturday at the age of 90. spinningfields,,, 65-6,,!to enhance singapore's overall vaccine coverage and offer more flexibility, the government will allow private healthcare providers here to import and administer alternative covid-19 vaccines via special access routes (sars).
hdb resale flats are a great alternative for those who can't wait years for a bto.
compare hdb resale flat prices and trends in this comprehensive guide to resale flats in singapore.
israeli opposition leader yair lapid on monday said many obstacles remain before a diverse coalition can be built to oust veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu but voiced hope it will achieve the "greater goal".
citi | wharton global wealth institute,polish police said monday they were investigating a fake bomb threat that forced a ryanair passenger plane travelling from dublin to krakow to make an emergency landing in berlin.
prime minister lee hsien loong appeared in court via video conferencing on monday (31 may) in a defamation suit against a writer from the online citizen, rubaashini who was absent from the hearing.
brazil's president jair bolsonaro promised the yanomami indigenous people in remarks released sunday that there will be no mining on their land unless they want it.
here is what whole mouth dental implants should cost you in your arearesidents of a small french town laid cards and flowers saturday at the spot where a "very kind" and "gentle" policewoman was seriously wounded in a knife attack the day before, the latest in a spate of attacks on officers.
two people were killed and at least 20 wounded early sunday when three shooters fired indiscriminately into a crowd outside a concert in the miami area, police said, the latest shooting in a year that has seen a surge in both gun sales and gun violence.
hong kong police have arrested an elderly democracy activist as she made a solo demonstration over china's deadly tiananmen crackdown in a vivid illustration of the zero protest tolerance now wielded by authorities in the financial hub.
at the age of 68, khaw boon wan has been called out of retirement to chair the new media entity of singapore press holdings (sph).
he is considered the best man for the job.
they would have us believe that it has nothing to do with the fact that khaw is a former heavyweight minister and former chairman of the people's action party (pap).
the current chairman of sph is lee boon yang, yet another former minister.
he succeeded tony tan, a former minister who stepped down as chairman of sph to contest in the presidential election.
and before tony tan, who was the sph chairman?
s.  r.  nathan, who also became president after his stint as sph chairman.
sph as a breeding ground for the presidency?now, is there any wonder why sph has been mired in such massive challenges that calls for an urgent restructuring?
the company has been led by people with deep-seated links to the ruling pap government, and with entirely no media experience.
the same goes for the current sph ceo, ng yat chung, a former army general with absolutely no media experience.
he succeeded alan chan, a civil servant for decades, and a former principal private secretary to the late lee kuan yew.
the current president, mdm halimah yacob, did not serve as sph chairman.
but she too is a former political appointee as speaker of parliament, who was considered the best person for the job of president.
indeed, no one was good enough to even compete against her in the walkover presidential election because no certificate of eligibility was issued to anyone else.
but, there is one former pap guy who is not considered the best man for anything – dr tan cheng bock.
not since dr tan contested the presidential election against the pap candidate tony tan.
and definitely not since dr tan started his own political party.
they say dr tan has lost his way.
the truth is, for the pap, it is their way or the highway.
when you use the same dog-tired formula, what do you end up with?
to put it mildly, the same dog-tired results!can a segment of singaporeans be blamed for being sick and tired of it?
© 2006 2021 the online citizen© 2006 2021 the online citizen
singapore a new initiative to pay random visits to employers and their foreign domestic workers has uncovered some instances of employers illegally holding on to their workers' passports and work permits.
the ministry of manpower (mom) has made 200 such checks since last month.
domestic workers and migrant welfare groups told the straits times (st) that the new measures, which include conducting more in-person interviews with maids, would help ensure decent living and working arrangements for them.
advocacy groups, however, said that mandating proper conditions would be even better.
in response to queries from st, an mom spokesman said: "thus far, employers have been supportive and allowed our officers to interview their migrant domestic workers (mdws).
"the initiative comes on the heels of a few cases where domestic helpers were badly abused.
in february, housewife gaiyathiri murugayan admitted to starving and torturing myanmar maid piang ngaih don, 24, leading to her death.
as at december last year, 247,000 work permits had been issued for foreign domestic workers, the mom spokesman added.
mom also said its officers are trained to look out for signs of abuse and pick up cues of stress and anxiety while speaking to domestic helpers.
each house visit typically lasts 20 minutes.
[[nid:467235]]in-person interviews with workers are done by the centre for domestic employees (cde), an initiative of the national trades union congress.
since late 2017, the centre has interviewed an average of 2,000 randomly selected domestic workers a month, and it aims to expand the interviews to cover all first-time migrant domestic workers by the year end.
due to the covid-19 pandemic, the cde currently conducts interviews by video.
cde executive director shamsul kamar said: "common areas of concern raised by a small number of migrant domestic workers include insufficient rest and food; having their personal documents such as passports, work permits, contract being withheld from them; unsafe work environment, methods; or illegal deployment and salary issues.
these cases are reported to mom for further investigation.
"mr shamsul added that cde reports cases where domestic helpers are physically harmed by their employer to the police immediately.
indonesian domestic helper nelvin ganaga said she is happy to hear of mom's new initiative.
she said it is important for mom to ensure that domestic workers have sufficient time and space to talk to their families and make friends in singapore.
[[nid:435412]]the 39-year-old experienced abuse with a former employer in 2015.  the employer's daughter and mother would step on ms ganaga when she slept at night and even spat in her food once.
the seven-year-old child would also pinch ms ganaga until she was bruised and continued to do so even after being scolded by ms ganaga's employer.
although ms ganaga asked to return to her agency, her employer refused and sent her back to jakarta instead.
ms ganaga then spent a month in batam before coming back to singapore, but it meant she had to pay new agency fees all over again to work here.
ms ganaga began working in 2016 for her current employer, with whom she has a good relationship.
she treats the family's children like her own, she said.
employers who spoke to st said they support the house visits as that is one way to ensure domestic helpers are being treated fairly.
ms ganaga's current employer, ms lau joon-nie, 50, said: "it's a step in the right direction to check on mdws' well-being and mental health, given that it's been a tough year for everyone and those of them who were due for home leave would not have been able to return.
"[[nid:482467]]added ms lau, director of a non-profit organisation that focuses on the media industry: "helpers are not mind readers, nor did they grow up in the environment we did, so they cannot be assumed to know what we expect from them.
it helps to ask oneself: how would you want your employer to treat you if you were in their shoes?"
local migrant welfare groups said more can be done to support foreign domestic workers here.
the former president of transient workers count too (twc2), mr john gee, listed equipping each domestic helper with a mobile phone, easing their terms for transfer and giving them access to an employer's past record on hired help as other steps that can be implemented.
he also said the authorities should look into ensuring helpers have a mandatory day off each week which cannot be negotiated away for payment.
"a worker who goes out freely can seek advice from other workers, non-governmental organisations, her agents or mom and could leave her employers if she felt desperate enough.
in such cases, potential abusers might well think twice before acting, and workers could act in their own defence before any abuse escalated," he said.
this article was first published in the straits times.
permission required for reproduction.
singapore: people who cannot take the two covid-19 vaccines currently authorised in singapore will soon have access to other vaccines, said the ministry of health (moh) on monday (may 31).
it will allow access to these vaccines under the special access route – an existing process for the import and supply of unregistered medicines to address unmet medical needs.
currently, singapore residents can get vaccinated with either the pfizer-biontech or moderna vaccines – both mrna vaccines – under its national inoculation programme.
"there has been interest to access alternate vaccines used in other countries, mostly due to various medical reasons which prevent individuals from taking the two authorised vaccines in singapore," said moh.
"however, there have either been no applications for approval of these alternate vaccines in singapore, or evaluation is still ongoing.
"the mrna vaccines are not suitable for those who have had severe allergic reactions such as anaphylaxis and for immunocompromised people.
the pfizer-biontech vaccine is being administered to singapore residents aged 12 and above and the moderna vaccine to those aged 18 and above.
however, health minister ong ye kung said on monday that after an extensive review, more people will be able to get the mrna vaccines.
these include pregnant or breastfeeding women, cancer patients receiving treatment and those with severe cutaneous adverse reactions, such as drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome and stevens-johnson syndrome.
"the expert committee is also examining the data and reviewing the current policy where we restrict individuals with known anaphylaxis, to take the vaccine," said mr ong.
"specifically, the committee is reviewing the restriction for those who are not allergic to the mrna vaccine or its components, but other substances like seafood, painkillers, antibiotics.
"there are more than 30,000 people in this group, he said.
while the review will allow more people from this group to be inoculated, moh will also allow them to use some other vaccines to provide more flexibility, he said.
the ministry will allow the special access route to be used for the supply of covid-19 vaccines that are on the world health organization's (who) emergency use listing, it said.
these vaccines include those by johnson & johnson, astrazeneca and sinopharm.
"as and when the who approves the sinovac vaccine into its emergency use list, the licensed healthcare institution can apply to moh to draw on our existing stock of 200,000 doses to administer to those who wish to have it," said mr ong.
the use of such vaccines should be according to who guidelines and will be time-limited for the duration of the pandemic, said moh.
this avenue will be made available through the private healthcare sector, it said.
"like all other medicines supplied under the special access route, the doctor administering the vaccine and the patient should discuss the risks and benefits of using vaccines not registered or authorised by the health sciences authority, and jointly make an informed decision," said moh.
those who opt for these vaccines will also have to sign a consent form to acknowledge that they have discussed with their doctor and accept all responsibility for the risks.
the government will not subsidise these vaccines, and people who receive these jabs will not be eligible for its financial assistance programme for vaccine injuries.
as more data becomes available, moh will be able to determine if people vaccinated under the special access route may be eligible for the same exemptions on testing or public health restrictions, which may be extended to those vaccinated under the national programme, said the ministry.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore: singapore is expanding its national covid-19 vaccination programme to include students, with registrations for more than 400,000 schoolchildren aged 12 and above to open on tuesday (jun 1).
theannouncement, made by prime minister lee hsien loong in a televised speech on monday, comes after the pfizer-biontech vaccine was approved by the health sciences authority for those aged 12 to 15 earlier this month.
the exercise will begin with graduating cohorts from secondary schools and at the pre-university levels, said the ministry of education (moe) in a separate press release.
slots will be available from jun 3. here are some frequently asked questions about the vaccination exercise for students and how they can get their jab.
q: how do i register for the vaccine for myself or my child?a: eligible students aged 18 and above as well as parents of children below 18 will progressively receive smses with a unique registration link, said the education ministry.
graduating cohorts from secondary schools and at the pre-university levels in particular, students sitting for the gce n-, o- or a-level examinations later this year will be the first to receive the vaccination invitation.
over the next two weeks, the remaining full-time students in schools and institutes of higher learning will receive their invitations to register for the vaccine, said the education ministry.
this includes privately-funded schools, madrasahs and special education schools, said moe in the press release.
privately-funded schools comprise anglo-chinese school (international), st joseph's institution international high school and hwa chong international school.
parents of students in graduating cohorts who do not receive the sms by jun 3 should contact their children's school for assistance.
"schools will also be reaching out to parents of students in mainstream primary and secondary schools separately with additional details on their vaccinations.
in general, students who are in schools and the institutes of higher learning should receive their smses by the end of the second week of june," said moe in a factsheet.
sms invites will only be sent to parents or guardians of children who are 12 years old as of jun 1.  students whose 12th birthday fall after jun 1 will be invited for their vaccination at a later date, said moe.
q: can i choose which vaccine i want to take?a: students below 18 will only be offered the pfizer-biontech covid-19 vaccine, while those aged 18 and above can opt for either vaccine from pfizer-biontech or moderna, said the education ministry.
for both vaccines, the interval between the first and second dose will be six to eight weeks.
q: where can i get vaccinated?a: eligible students can get their jabs at community vaccination centres.
there will also be four dedicated moe vaccination centres set up at raffles city convention centre, ite college central, ite college east and ite college west, said moe.
ite will arrange for their students to take their vaccinations on campus.
each ite centre will have up to 1,600 vaccination slots per day, "comparable" to community vaccination centres, while raffles convention centre can take up to 2,000 slots per day, said moe in a briefing on monday.
the ministry will also deploy mobile vaccination teams to special education schools to "facilitate access" for eligible students who may find it challenging to visit a vaccination centre.
q: will parents be allowed to accompany their child to the vaccination centre?a: parents are required to accompany their child to the vaccination centre if they are below 13 years old.
parents of students aged 13 and above are not required to be present.
should they choose to do so, however, they will be asked to wait at a family area outside the vaccination room to avoid congestion and ensure compliance with safe management measures.
students in special education schools must also be accompanied by a parent or guardian.
parental or guardian consent is also required for students below 18, as part of the booking process for the vaccination slots through the national appointment system, said moe.
consent given via the system will be collected once, and will apply for both doses of the vaccine.
q: what happens if i miss my vaccination appointment?
will i be allowed to make another appointment?a: students who miss their first vaccination appointment during the moe vaccination exercise will be able to reschedule when the vaccination is open to the public for their age bands, said the ministry in the factsheet.
if students miss their second vaccination appointment, they should contact moh at 1800 333 9999 for further assistance.
q: what if my vaccination appointment clashes with my upcoming oral national examinations?a: if students' upcoming oral national examination schedules clash with their appointment dates for the first or second dose of their vaccination, changes to their oral examination dates within the examination window can be accommodated where possible, said the education ministry.
new appointment dates for the vaccination can also be scheduled.
special consideration may be applicable if rescheduling is not possible, and parents or students should provide evidence of the vaccination appointment to facilitate this, said moe.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
whether it's politics or strict covid-19 measures in question, the hong kong government says everyone is equal before the law—but some classes of society, we're constantly reminded, are more equal than others.
the securities and futures commission (sfc), the city's financial regulator, announced friday that vaccinated senior bankers arriving in hong kong can now be exempted from serving a mandatory 21-day hotel quarantine.
they can apply for the exemption through the commission by submitting their proposed itinerary during their stay in hong kong as well as their covid-19 vaccination record.
compulsory hotel quarantines have been in place for returning travelers (except from those arriving from mainland china) since last november.
in december, the quarantine length was increased from 14 to 21 days.
read more: mid-levels residents pen legal letter to health dep't demanding 'basis' for 21-day quarantine, claiming 'false imprisonment'in its notice, the sfc did not clarify the definition of a "senior executive.
"while the bankers would be bound by strict rules, including only being allowed to visit pre-approved places listed on the itinerary, the announcement has raised eyebrows among the public questioning the fairness of the exemption.
fully vaccinated individuals arriving in hong kong still have to undergo quarantine at a designated hotel, albeit a shorter one: 14 days in the hotel and the remaining seven self-monitoring at home.
no other professions or groups have been exempted from the quarantine policy.
according to the financial times, hong kong's "expat finance community" voiced "deep concerns" about the city's strict policies when a gym cluster in march sent hundreds—including expats working at top financial institutions—packing and into government quarantine facilities.
follow coconuts on instagram and twitter for more fresh and juicy news in your feeds.
you must be logged in as a coconuts user to comment.
whether it's politics or strict covid-19 measures in question, the.
.
.
police are looking into an incident involving a traffic cop who.
.
.
1.  submit free events and venues to the coconuts directory.
2.  comment on stories.
3.  save your favorite stories for easy reference.
on this registration page you can sign up to become a free coconuts user, which does not grant you unlimited access to coconuts content.
to read unlimited coconuts content and get other great benefits, please sign up to become a coco+ member here.
read more about the difference between users and members here.
don't have a coconuts user?
click here to create one.
actor joe lara, who is presumed dead along with seven other people after a plane crashed in a lake near nashville city on saturday, was best known for his role as tarzan in the once-popular american tv series tarzan: the epic adventures.
born on october 2, 1962 in san diego, california, joe first appeared in the 1988 movie night wars as an unnamed american solider.
in 1989, the actor had a major breakthrough as he cleared the audition for a tv movie on tarzan called tarzan in manhattan.
he landed the lead role.
post tarzan in manhattan, he was seen in two more tv movies called gunsmoke: the last apache and danger island.
he returned as tarzan in the show tarzan: the epic adventures in 1996.  joe was also popular for having appeared in many actioners over the years like steel frontier, armstrong, warhead among others.
in 2002, joe quit acting to pursue a career in his second love, country music.
joe lara tied the knot with author gwen shamblin in 2018.  the couple are survived by two children from gwen's first marriage.
📣 the indian express is now on telegram.
click here to join our channel (@indianexpress) and stay updated with the latest headlinesfor all the latest entertainment news, download indian express app.
 jean iauthe straits timesmay 28, 2021a woman admitted on friday (may 28) to slapping the face of a then eight-year-old girl in an mrt train.
she wanted to stop the girl from leaving the train without apologising for having stepped on her foot.
but the girl had apologised to connie soh, 45, who was talking loudly on her phone at the time and did not hear the apology.
on friday, soh pleaded guilty to one charge of voluntarily causing hurt.
she faces enhanced penalties as the victim is under 14 years old.
the court heard that on july 15 last year, some time before 1.
47pm, the victim accidentally stepped on soh's left foot after boarding the mrt train with her mother at choa chu kang station.
she apologised to soh, who was talking loudly on her phone at the time and did not hear the apology.
soh confronted the victim's mother and asked her why the girl did not apologise for stepping on her foot.
but the mother told soh that her daughter had apologised, and an argument ensued.
when the train reached yew tee station and the girl and her mother proceeded to exit the train carriage, soh slapped the girl on her left cheek to try to prevent her from leaving without apologising.
the girl started to cry, and her mother called the police from the station soon after.
later that day, the mother took her daughter to national university hospital, where a doctor noted that the girl had sustained a left cheek contusion, or bruise.
she was given a two-day medical certificate, with excuse from physical activity until july 19 that year.
deputy public prosecutor joseph gwee urged the court to sentence soh to a fine of at least $5,000, calling soh's response "(an) objectively disproportionate one (that was) committed in a public place".
soh is scheduled for sentencing on june 18.  one other charge of using criminal force to poke the nose of the girl's mother will be taken into account during sentencing.
for voluntarily causing hurt, an offender can be jailed for up to three years, fined up to $5,000, or both.
soh faces double this maximum penalty as the girl was under 14. get a copy of the straits times or go to straitstimes.
com for more stories.
get more of stomp's latest updates by following us on facebook, whatsapp, twitter, instagram and youtube.
view the discussion thread.
view the discussion thread.
download the new stomp app today.
sph digital news | the straits timesall rights reserved | terms & conditions | data protection policy | advertise with ussph digital news / stomp / copyright (c) 2019 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
taipei (reuters) -taiwan's government has signed deals with two local companies to provide up to 20 million doses of their covid-19 vaccines, the official central news agency said on sunday, in a boost to the island's pandemic fight.
the news comes days after the chinese-claimed island blamed beijing week for blocking a deal earlier this year for biontech se vaccines, which china denies.
after recording just a handful of daily infections for months, taiwan is dealing with relatively large numbers of community transmissions, though infection rates are starting to fall.
it has only vaccinated around 1% of its more than 23 million people but has almost 30 million shots on order, from astrazeneca plc, moderna inc and two domestic firms.
the central news agency said the government had on friday signed deals with medigen vaccine biologics corp and united biomedical inc for five million doses each, and had oral agreements for another five million each, for a total of 20 million shots.
medigen confirmed the details in a statement to the stock exchange while the government's central epidemic command centre said it would issue a statement later.
united biomedical did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
however, neither shot has yet been formally approved for use and both are still undergoing tests, which taiwan's government says are going well.
earlier on sunday, health minister chen shih-chung said taiwan has not given up hope of eventually getting covid-19 vaccines from germany's biontech.
shanghai fosun pharmaceutical group co has a contract with biontech to sell the vaccines in greater china, including to taiwan, but taiwan's government says it will only deal with germany's biontech directly and does not trust vaccines from china.
outside of greater china, biontech has partnered with pfizer inc. .
taiwan is under its second-highest level of curbs to stop the spread of infections, including limiting personal gatherings and closing entertainment venues.
chen said the task was to ensure those measures were being properly enforced, adding, "at present there are no plans or intentions for a lockdown.
"taiwan reported 355 domestic covid-19 cases on sunday, down from 486 on saturday.
total daily cases peaked on may 17 and have been falling since friday.
(reporting by ben blanchard; editing by william mallard and emelia sithole-matarise)china and taiwan traded more accusations on monday about covid-19 vaccines, with beijing saying they should not be a political tool while taiwan's ruling party said china was the "black hand" preventing it accessing shots internationally.
the two have sparred repeatedly since the pandemic started, over everything from china's transparency about the virus' spread to taiwan's lack of full access to the world health organization, worsening already bad ties.
japan said on friday it would consider sharing covid-19 vaccines with other countries as a ruling party panel urged that part of its stock of astrazeneca plc doses be provided to chinese-claimed taiwan, which welcomed the news.
(bloomberg) -- almost two dozen cities across china's key industrial province of guangdong are now rationing electricity to businesses as the global economic recovery and hot summer weather boost demand.
some 21 municipalities in the southern province that's home to almost 130 million people are limiting power use, china southern power grid co.  said in a statement on wechat.
electricity consumption in the grid operator's five-province region is up 24% this year through may 29 from the same period in 2020 and surged to an all-time high on may 21. power hasn't been affected for homes or public utilities, china southern said.
businesses and factories have been hit, however, with some being forced to shut several days a week, constraining their ability to fulfill orders.
several have turned to buying portable generators to keep the lights on.
see also: china's power crunch means sidewalks packed with generatorsa resurgence in activity from the very businesses and factories now facing shortages is the main reason for the strong demand.
high temperatures are also boosting air-conditioning demand, according to the grid manager, while low rainfall in yunnan province means less hydropower supply.
china southern didn't specify which municipalities were rationing power.
chinese news site jiemian reported curtailments in cities in guangdong including guangzhou, foshan, shantou and dongguan.
more stories like this are available on bloomberg.
comsubscribe now to stay ahead with the most trusted business news source.
©2021 bloomberg l. p. the most ambitious entrepreneurs have trusted ey to advise them for more than 30 years.
thailand is redoubling efforts to stop the spread of the coronavirus in labor camps, factories and markets as the number of new reported cases surged monday to the highest level so far.
a government spokesman said public health authorities met with labor and industry officials to discuss better ways to curb infections that are concentrated in crowded, high-risk places.
the government reported a record 5,485 new cases on monday, with nearly 2,000 in prisons.
"sunday morning" correspondent david pogue looks back at the life of veteran broadway actor samuel e.  wright, who starred on stage in "the lion king," but is best known as the voice of sebastian the crab in the animated disney musical, "the little mermaid.
"it's a great time to buy those fresh summer kicks you've been eyeing.
,.
!
(bloomberg) -- iran started its first transfer of crude oil via its strategic goreh-jask pipeline, allowing the country to bypass the strait of hormuz, the state-run islamic republic news agency reported.
the oil passed through the pipeline's second pump house and reached a facility near the port of jask, irna said, without giving any details on the size or volume of the transfer.
earlier this month the state-run national iranian oil co.  said it had started injecting crude into the pipeline and that oil shipments from the jask region on the gulf of oman coast will start next month, adding that the 1,000-kilometer (620-mile) conduit will be officially opened by president hassan rouhani in the near future.
iran to start oil exports from port skirting troubled straitmost of iran's energy exports currently pass through the strait of hormuz, a narrow shipping channel on the persian gulf that was plunged into crisis after former president donald trump abandoned the 2015 nuclear deal and reinforced sanctions on iran's oil sector and wider economy.
oil markets are closely watching talks between iran and world powers to revive that accord and remove a raft of u. s.  sanctions from the islamic republic's energy sector and wider economy, helping it reinstate millions of barrels of exports.
earlier this month rouhani said negotiators had already accepted that sanctions on iran's oil, shipping, insurance and banking industries will be lifted, triggering a drop in oil prices.
iran gears up for return to oil market as u. s.  talks advance (1)(updates with background and more context.
)more stories like this are available on bloomberg.
comsubscribe now to stay ahead with the most trusted business news source.
©2021 bloomberg l. p. two of the six injured victims in monday's crash had to be extricated from their vehicles.
all were hospitalized.
the wife of belgium's ambassador to south korea is seen slapping a shop worker in cctv footage.
《!》ut,!texas' gop lieutenant governor suggests republicans only have themselves to blame for democrats killing election billshe called hosting "jeopardy!"
one of the most iconic things she will do in her career.
alex salmond has accused the duke of cambridge of displaying "poor judgment" by meeting gordon brown in scotland last week and urged the royal family to stay out of the independence debate.
the former first minister said it would be "extraordinarily foolish" for the monarchy to get dragged into the row over scottish separation and questioned "what on earth prince william thought he was doing" by meeting mr brown.
he said royals should beware "unscrupulous unionist desperation" to use them for political ends and urged them to follow the queen's "very wise" example to "keep the monarchy over and above politics".
the duke and duchess of cambridge met mr brown and his wife sarah after the former labour prime minister relaunched his our scottish future think tank as a pro-union campaign movement.
kensington palace later confirmed the royal couple had listened to differing political views during their week-long tour, which was said to be part of a charm offensive to turn scots away from independence.
nicola sturgeon has unveiled plans for another separation vote by the end of 2023, after the immediate covid crisis has passed but while scotland is still recovering from the pandemic.
but, in a video message to supporters of his alba party, mr salmond it would be "infinitely better" for his former protegee to "seize the moment and strike while the iron is hot".
he claimed the tories "are surprised that they are not already facing a renewed constitutional challenge" after the snp clearly won the holyrood election but fell one seat short of a majority.
the alba party failed to win a single seat.
the duke and duchess of cambridge, who are known in scotland as the earl and countess of strathearn, met mr brown and his wife in an unpublicised meeting at the palace of holyroodhouse in edinburgh last thursday.
,,,$14,500 ,,.
26,20,000,,. kawhi leonard and paul george lead the clippers to a game 4 defeat of the mavericks, and the series is looking like it could be over.
jasmine hartin held since friday over death of policemanwee luen chia wakes up early to get his four-year-old daughter ready for school and spends part of his day at the office in downtown singapore.
,,98%,,!china announced on monday that couples would be allowed to have up to three children, up from the current limit of two, in a bid to reverse a rapid decline in new births.
but who wants to have three kids?rangers attempt to trace park visitor after rule prohibiting people from coming within 100 yards of grizzlies apparently brokenthe video circulating on twitter shows the crowd cheering the suggestion of a coup in the ushere is what whole mouth dental implants should cost you in your areademocrats pulled an unprecedented move to defeat the bill for now, but texas republicans are likely to bring it back up in a special session.
the mavs had a 2-0 series lead and 30-11 edge in game 3, but since then the clippers have outscored the mavs 213-159 and have now tied the series.
in japan, local authorities are giving away renovation subsidies to incentivize people to move into the country's rural areas.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
washington as covid-19 cases rise across south-east and north-east asia, this time in some countries and cities in the form of faster-spreading variants, the livelihoods of hundreds of millions hang on whether there should be a lockdown, and to what degree.
by and large, the classic policy response to outbreaks has been lockdowns.
but lockdowns last year, while succeeding in lowering infections, contributed considerably to the global recession.
yet lockdowns alone are not to blame for the recession, which was also driven by people voluntarily refraining from social interactions as they feared contracting the virus, the international monetary fund (imf) noted last october.
"therefore, lifting lockdowns is unlikely to lead to a decisive and sustained economic boost if infections are still elevated, as voluntary social distancing will likely persist," the imf said.
lockdowns work only if they are well-timed, targeted and airtight.
when they are all of the above, they do strangle economic growth, but they also stop the spread of the virus which ultimately is good for economic growth.
"lockdowns are a blunt instrument," says dr gautam menon, a professor of physics and biology at ashoka university in india.
"they are an invaluable part of the armoury.
but they should be used as locally as possible, if they must be.
"in early 2020, much of the world resorted to sweeping lockdowns.
life came to a near standstill.
but lockdowns varied according to the particular circumstances of every country or city.
in india, in late march last year, a nationwide lockdown was too much too soon, and the economic fallout was so bad that india could not repeat a national lockdown later, when it was arguably needed more.
instead, earlier this year, amid misplaced triumphalism, political rallies and religious gatherings were allowed with predictably catastrophic results.
in the united states, there was no national lockdown; states were left to their own devices and imposed varying versions of lockdowns, many of them too late and undermined by weaknesses, from ambiguous public messaging to cultural resistance.
thanks to this, it was the us that suffered the world's worst death toll last year.
the research is clear: covid-19 restrictions work to break the chain of infection, with timely, sharper restrictions having greater effect than slower, weaker ones.
the global lockdown rush last year came amid varying epidemiological situations, and while some countries locked down too late, others did so too soon.
"we now have definitive proof here in the us that rigorous lockdowns have been associated with far less severe outbreaks, lower death counts and more rapid recovery," science writer and analyst laurie garrett told the sunday times.
"in addition, vaccine acceptance has run higher in states that paid a big price with lockdowns the population is eager to get back to fun, family and offices.
"but lockdowns are economically painful "and severely so for the poorest, lowest-skilled labourers", ms garrett said.
"without careful government intervention, lockdowns exacerbate discrimination, and widen gaps in relative wealth and access to such basics as food and housing.
immigrants and minority groups are particularly vulnerable.
"in addition, prolonged lockdowns have had other adverse health effects.
they hamper routine medical and dental exams, and contribute to alcohol and drug abuse and domestic violence.
for people employed in daily wage work, who because of the nature of the job cannot work from home, the covid-19 recession has been a catastrophe.
towards the end of last year, several countries, including vietnam, thailand and singapore, appeared to have done a lot right, with local spread of the disease limited.
yet now, covid-19 cases are back up.
oxford university's blavatnik school of government maintains what is probably the world's largest database tracking government responses to the pandemic.
in a march blog post before the current wave hit south-east asia, dr thomas hale noted that success and failure are moving targets.
"some governments were able to contain the first wave and then preserve those gains with a mix of targeted closure and containment measures, extensive testing and contact tracing, and firm international border controls," he wrote.
"places like china, taiwan, vietnam and new zealand all managed not just to flatten the curve but to keep it flat, albeit with a few small flare-ups.
"in an interview, dr hale told the sunday times that south-east and north-east asian countries and cities seeing a surge are still in a relatively good position.
"you can have a very good defence, but then eventually this is a random process.
so, some person spread some disease to some other person and it gets a little bit out of control and it misses the testing.
.
.
and then you have an outbreak," he said.
"we don't know exactly, but it seems like many of these recent outbreaks are potentially two new variants that are more contagious.
so what worked before may not work against these new variants.
and that's part of the very dynamic nature of this.
"dr hale added: "to my mind, the lockdown is a solution you might need, but really only if your test-and-trace system fails in the first instance.
"in countries such as australia, china and new zealand, the test-and-trace system has been really good at preventing outbreaks from getting out of control, "but even the best ones will, at some point, fail and then they'll need some sort of lockdown, hopefully very short, fast, localised".
dr hale compared lockdowns to how you might need to amputate a limb to stop an infection.
it is a costly policy, and you can do it only so many times.
"and so ideally, you would do it when it's so small that you can do that amputation with the scalpel really to jump on it very quickly before it spreads," he said.
"if, however, the infection has already spread very far.
.
.
you need a more serious amputation.
and that's where, unfortunately, many countries have found themselves.
"an aggressive vaccination programme is the key, ms garrett stressed.
in its absence, only two non-pharmaceutical interventions make a significant dent in slowing covid-19: consistent and proper mask-wearing, and stringent social distancing.
dr menon added: "it would be best if nations turned their attention to vaccinating as many as they can and as fast as they can.
they can then avoid the economic consequences and uncertainties associated with a lockdown.
"join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
hours after naomi osaka was fined $15,000 and warned of stiffer consequences for shirking french open media responsibilities, her older sister shed light on what prompted the tennis phenom's press boycott.
mari osaka posted a message on reddit sunday afternoon explaining that naomi's refusal to speak with media started with criticism over her performance on clay surfaces.
mari, a retired tennis player, deleted the post after it gained traction on social media, but not before the new york times verified with naomi osaka's team that it was written by mari.
"naomi mentioned to me before the tournament that a family member had come up to her and remarked that she's bad at clay," mari wrote.
"at every press conference she's told she's had a bad record on clay.
when she lost in rome r1 she was not ok mentally.
"her confidence was completely shattered and i think that everyone's remarks and opinions have gotten to her head and she herself believed that she was bad on clay.
"osaka won her opening-round match at the french open on sunday against patricia maria tig in straight sets.
after the match, she skipped her media obligations as she wrote that she would in a statement last week, citing mental health concerns.
mari wrote that naomi's refusal to speak with media was a form of "protecting her mind.
""so her solution was to block everything out," mari continued.
"no talking to people who is (sic) going to put doubt in her mind.
she's protecting her mind hence why it's called mental health.
"mari inaccurately wrote in her reddit post that "tennis players don't get paid to do press conferences. "
sunday's fine statement signed by the lead executives from each of tennis' four grand slams reminded osaka that meeting with media is a "contractual obligation" and warned of more significant consequences moving forward, including potential suspension from grand slam play.
"we have advised naomi osaka that should she continue to ignore her media obligations during the tournament, she would be exposing herself to possible further code of conduct infringement consequences.
"as might be expected, repeat violations attract tougher sanctions including default from the tournament (code of conduct article iii t. ) and the trigger of a major offense investigation that could lead to more substantial fines and future grand slam suspensions (code of conduct article iv a.
3.
).
"according to the statement, osaka didn't respond when tournament organizers reached "to check on her well-being and offer support. "
tournament organizers described media obligations as a "core element of the grand slam regulations" and wrote that osaka skipping hers provides an unfair competitive advantage.
"as a sport there is nothing more important than ensuring no player has an unfair advantage over another, which unfortunately is the case in this situation if one player refuses to dedicate time to participate in media commitments while the others all honour their commitments," the statement continued.
osaka, ranked no.
2 in the world, will take on romania's ana bogdan in round 2 on wednesday, where she opened as a -350 betting favorite.
the tennis world will be focused on osaka during and after the match.
more from yahoo sports:tony parker qualifies for world series of poker main eventbushnell: olympians must sign waiver to compete in tokyorafael nadal, other tennis stars react to naomi osakahaynes: how lakers have operated after hitting vaccine thresholdsri lanka launched a criminal probe on sunday into a massive container ship fire that has swamped the island nation's coast with plastic pollution in an unprecedented marine disaster.
tonnes of microplastic granules have inundated the south asian country's famed beaches, forcing a fishing ban and prompting fears of ecological damage.
the ministry of health (moh) on sunday (30 may) confirmed the detection of 25 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,028.
《!》ut,!british prime minister boris johnson married his fiancee carrie symonds in a "secret ceremony" on saturday, uk media reports said.
whilst the typical homeownership journey for most singaporeans is 'upgrading' from an hdb flat to a private property (e. g.   homeowners who need more space for their growing families might move from their smaller condo to a larger hdb flat.
on the other hand, an older couple may also choose to move into a smaller hdb flat once their children have moved out.
a 51-year-old woman recovering from a brain tumour died after consuming traditional chinese medicine (tcm) which likely caused her acute liver failure, the state coroner found.
smart,5%!$1,600,!the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
singapore residents will soon be able to purchase "do-it-yourself" covid-19 tests over the counter at pharmacies, said prime minister lee hsien loong on monday (31 may).
from tuesday (1 june), 400,000 students from schools and ihls can register for the covid-19 vaccine.
???,.
,,,.
israeli and egyptian officials held talks in both countries sunday aimed at bolstering the cairo-brokered ceasefire that ended the latest deadly flare-up of violence between the jewish state and gaza's hamas rulers.
he risked everything to give his baby girl a second chance at life this article, cannabis can mean death in malaysia.
for one dad, it also meant life for his daughter.
, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
gavin macleod, a veteran supporting actor best known for his role as an ever-smiling cruise ship captain on the 1970s-80s sitcom "the love boat," died saturday at the age of 90.
$6,600「」,$100「」to enhance singapore's overall vaccine coverage and offer more flexibility, the government will allow private healthcare providers here to import and administer alternative covid-19 vaccines via special access routes (sars).
hdb resale flats are a great alternative for those who can't wait years for a bto.
compare hdb resale flat prices and trends in this comprehensive guide to resale flats in singapore.
israeli opposition leader yair lapid on monday said many obstacles remain before a diverse coalition can be built to oust veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu but voiced hope it will achieve the "greater goal".
all asset classes.
industry-leading prices.
user-friendly investing online.
polish police said monday they were investigating a fake bomb threat that forced a ryanair passenger plane travelling from dublin to krakow to make an emergency landing in berlin.
prime minister lee hsien loong appeared in court via video conferencing on monday (31 may) in a defamation suit against a writer from the online citizen, rubaashini who was absent from the hearing.
brazil's president jair bolsonaro promised the yanomami indigenous people in remarks released sunday that there will be no mining on their land unless they want it.
,!
.
!residents of a small french town laid cards and flowers saturday at the spot where a "very kind" and "gentle" policewoman was seriously wounded in a knife attack the day before, the latest in a spate of attacks on officers.
two people were killed and at least 20 wounded early sunday when three shooters fired indiscriminately into a crowd outside a concert in the miami area, police said, the latest shooting in a year that has seen a surge in both gun sales and gun violence.
hong kong police have arrested an elderly democracy activist as she made a solo demonstration over china's deadly tiananmen crackdown in a vivid illustration of the zero protest tolerance now wielded by authorities in the financial hub.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore five friends who raced each other in lim chu kang road in the wee hours of dec 1, 2018, were on monday (may 31) jailed, fined and banned from driving.
ian goh debao, 32, admitted to a charge each of racing and dangerous driving in lim chu kang road towards jalan bahar.
his friends daniel chua wei chuan, 28, daniel lee jie, 28, hubert choo, 27, and samuel low shi li, 27 each pleaded guilty to a charge of racing.
all five were jailed for a week, fined $1,500 and banned from driving for 18 months.
goh was given an additional $2,500 fine for dangerous driving.
the court heard that the group made plans to go prawning that night and agreed to meet in lim chu kang road.
there, they saw a grey audi being driven to and fro along the stretch of road several times and this made them decide to race in pairs.
they fixed a spot near a bus stop as their starting point and were careful to avoid the speed camera on the stretch of road.
deputy public prosecutor kevin ho said the first race involved goh and chua.
goh was behind the wheel of a white bmw, while chua was driving a blue honda civic.
after chua sounded his horn three times, both cars sped off.
they drove in a straight line for about 1.
5km before making a u-turn to avoid the speed camera.
a health sciences authority report found that chua was driving at an average speed of 115kmh, 45kmh more than the speed limit, while goh was driving at around 110kmh.
the second race, involving goh and lee, took place at 12.
49am.
lee sounded the horn and both cars raced along the same stretch.
goh was found to be driving at around 96kmh, while lee averaged 85kmh.
both exceeded the speed limit of 70kmh.
the next two races, involving choo and low, took place in similar fashion.
court documents said that the speeds they were travelling at could not be estimated as the cars were too small in the video taken by a traffic police officer who was patrolling the area.
in sentencing them, district judge lorraine ho said that deterrence was needed, given the serious nature of the offences.
but she took into account the fact that no one was injured and no property was damaged as a result of the illegal racing, and all five had a clean driving record prior to the offences.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.

                    monday, 31 may 2021
                a man buys goods at a shop covered with plastic amid the coronavirus (covid-19) pandemic, in hanoi, vietnam, may 31.  reuters
tags / keywords:
vietnam
                                                                ,
                                                                                                hanoi
                                                                ,
                                                                                                to test
                                                                ,
                                                                                                all residents
                                                                ,
                                                                                                9 million
                                                                ,
                                                                                                covid-19
                                                                ,
                                                                                                cases
                                                                ,
                                                                                                rising



report it to us.
thank you for your report!copyright © 1995-
            

 star media group berhad (10894d)best viewed on chrome browsers.
{{item['v1 header']}}
   {{item['v1 body']}}

  {{item['v2 header']}}

are you having urinary troubles?
by taking the survey, it is deemed that you consent to the termswe hope you enjoy this feature!
vietnam began a new spate of social distancing restrictions in ho chin minh city on monday in an effort to curb a sharp rise in covid-19 cases.
the new measures will be in effect for fifteen days.
local authorities said they would conduct city-wide covid-19 tests in the business hub with testing capacity at 100,000 samples per day.
police manned new checkpoints, and students vacated a dorm to make way for a 6,000-bed field hospital.
compounding concerns is the discovery over the weekend by vietnamese officials of a 'very dangerous' combination of the indian and uk variants which spreads quickly by air.
the total number of cases in vietnam has more than doubled in the past month alone.
in the north of the country factories supplying global tech firms like apple and samsung are operating below capacity because of outbreaks according to industry sources.
state media said four thousand factory workers were screened and vaccinated for the virus before returning to production lines on monday.
sri lanka launched a criminal probe on sunday into a massive container ship fire that has swamped the island nation's coast with plastic pollution in an unprecedented marine disaster.
tonnes of microplastic granules have inundated the south asian country's famed beaches, forcing a fishing ban and prompting fears of ecological damage.
the ministry of health (moh) on sunday (30 may) confirmed the detection of 25 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,028.
《!》ut,!british prime minister boris johnson married his fiancee carrie symonds in a "secret ceremony" on saturday, uk media reports said.
whilst the typical homeownership journey for most singaporeans is 'upgrading' from an hdb flat to a private property (e. g.   homeowners who need more space for their growing families might move from their smaller condo to a larger hdb flat.
on the other hand, an older couple may also choose to move into a smaller hdb flat once their children have moved out.
a 51-year-old woman recovering from a brain tumour died after consuming traditional chinese medicine (tcm) which likely caused her acute liver failure, the state coroner found.
smart,5%!$1,600,!the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
singapore residents will soon be able to purchase "do-it-yourself" covid-19 tests over the counter at pharmacies, said prime minister lee hsien loong on monday (31 may).
from tuesday (1 june), 400,000 students from schools and ihls can register for the covid-19 vaccine.
$6,600「」,$100「」israeli and egyptian officials held talks in both countries sunday aimed at bolstering the cairo-brokered ceasefire that ended the latest deadly flare-up of violence between the jewish state and gaza's hamas rulers.
he risked everything to give his baby girl a second chance at life this article, cannabis can mean death in malaysia.
for one dad, it also meant life for his daughter.
, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
gavin macleod, a veteran supporting actor best known for his role as an ever-smiling cruise ship captain on the 1970s-80s sitcom "the love boat," died saturday at the age of 90.
???,.
,,,.
to enhance singapore's overall vaccine coverage and offer more flexibility, the government will allow private healthcare providers here to import and administer alternative covid-19 vaccines via special access routes (sars).
hdb resale flats are a great alternative for those who can't wait years for a bto.
compare hdb resale flat prices and trends in this comprehensive guide to resale flats in singapore.
israeli opposition leader yair lapid on monday said many obstacles remain before a diverse coalition can be built to oust veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu but voiced hope it will achieve the "greater goal".
,《》《》,,!polish police said monday they were investigating a fake bomb threat that forced a ryanair passenger plane travelling from dublin to krakow to make an emergency landing in berlin.
prime minister lee hsien loong appeared in court via video conferencing on monday (31 may) in a defamation suit against a writer from the online citizen, rubaashini who was absent from the hearing.
brazil's president jair bolsonaro promised the yanomami indigenous people in remarks released sunday that there will be no mining on their land unless they want it.
yahoo,,,『,』,!residents of a small french town laid cards and flowers saturday at the spot where a "very kind" and "gentle" policewoman was seriously wounded in a knife attack the day before, the latest in a spate of attacks on officers.
two people were killed and at least 20 wounded early sunday when three shooters fired indiscriminately into a crowd outside a concert in the miami area, police said, the latest shooting in a year that has seen a surge in both gun sales and gun violence.
hong kong police have arrested an elderly democracy activist as she made a solo demonstration over china's deadly tiananmen crackdown in a vivid illustration of the zero protest tolerance now wielded by authorities in the financial hub.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
petaling jaya (the star/asia news network) malaysian doctors will be forced to make the tough call over which patient should be given a bed in the intensive care unit (icu) because of the sharp rise in covid-19 cases, the health ministry said on sunday (may 30).
health director-general, tan sri dr noor hisham abdullah, said if active covid-19 cases exceed the capacity of the healthcare facilities in the country, doctors will have to prioritise icu beds.
"the health ministry has warned of possible scenarios in which doctors would have to make the difficult choice to prioritise icu beds for patients with a high recovery potential over patients with low recovery potential (poor prognosis).
"this is a difficult situation that we are all facing and the health ministry would like to call on all parties to work together," he said in a joint press conference with senior minister (security) datuk seri ismail sabri yaakob.
dr noor hisham said the numbers of available beds in icus, covid-19 hospitals, as well as quarantine and treatment centres, were declining because of rapidly rising cases.
the usage of icu beds for covid-19 patients was now at 104 per cent capacity, with 1,113 beds in use, while covid-19 hospital beds have reached 85 per cent capacity, with 10,190 patients currently hospitalised.
as for covid-19 quarantine and treatment centres, beds were now at 65 per cent capacity, with 27,183 beds in use while ventilators were at 60 per cent, with 2,138 total being used, of which 39 per cent were for covid-19 patients.
he added that the health ministry has taken the initiative to increase the number of beds in covid-19 hospitals and covid-19 hybrid hospitals by repurposing certain spaces in the hospitals into icu units.
"the kepala batas hospital field icu, as well as the proposed temporary takeover of the ukm children's hospital, are also among the steps we are taking to increase icu capacity.
"we are also collaborating with ngos that are offering medical assistance to open more icus in areas that need them," he said, adding that the lack of manpower is posing a major challenge to the ministry.
dr noor hisham also said the health ministry has increased the quarantine period for travellers arriving from overseas.
the quarantine period for five high-risk countries such as india, pakistan, sri lanka, nepal and bangladesh has been extended to 21 days.
he also said malaysia might be able to flatten the covid-19 curve in three to four months, but this will require cooperation from the public to adhere to the standard operating procedures.
an accelerated vaccination drive would also be vital to slow the infection curve.
he said with the rise of new variants of concern (voc), the two-week total lockdown starting tuesday was necessary to reduce the number of cases and give front-liners much needed breathing room.
adding to concerns, he said the health ministry had recently received information from vietnam about a new voc detected there, a hybrid of the variants first identified in britain and india.
"the new variants are concerning as they cause more infections and deaths.
"we must ramp up vaccinations and in june, we will be able to use over 10 million doses, this is necessary for us to do.
"our behaviour is the first line of defence and if we can increase vaccination rates, that will increase our protection against the virus.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore (the business times) q&m dental group will not proceed to set up a surgical mask manufacturing company with partners, as announced more than a year ago.
this is after it and its partners failed to meet definitive terms under a non-binding memorandum of understanding (mou), as made public on march 11, 2020, q&m dental said in a regulatory filing on saturday (may 29).
q&m dental had meant to partner hubei aishubao living supplies and guangzhou pharmasen.
they had intended to set up a joint venture for the proposed business.
the mou was due to terminate if definitive agreements over the proposed investment were not entered into within one year of the date of the mou.
"as at the date of this announcement, parties have failed to successfully negotiate and finalise the terms of the definitive agreements," q&m dental said.
"consequently, the mou is now terminated, and no party has any further obligation or liability against each other in respect of the mou.
"shares of q&m dental closed on friday at $0.
675, down half a cent.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore a new requirement that singapore citizens and permanent residents (prs) must test negative for covid-19 before being allowed to return home from high-risk countries kicked in at midnight on sunday (may 30).
infectious diseases experts say the move will help to protect front-line staff at the airport and could help to ease the load on singapore's healthcare system, which has had to deal with a spike in community cases in recent weeks.
but they also note that the measure has its limitations and implementing it is not as straightforward as it seems.
at least one legal expert has raised the issue of the constitutionality of the new requirement with the government.
the ministry of health (moh) said last wednesday that, from 11.
59pm on saturday, all singaporeans and prs returning to the country will have to present a valid negative covid-19 polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test taken within 72 hours before their departure.
this is the first time moh has required singaporeans and prs to take a pre-departure test.
the ministry had previously said it did not want to make it difficult for them to return home, should they be caught unprepared by rapidly deteriorating pandemic conditions abroad.
the immigration and checkpoints authority's (ica) safetravel website says those travelling by plane or by boat will have to present their test result at the air and sea checkpoints upon arrival in singapore.
those who have stayed in lower-risk areas, including australia, brunei, china, hong kong, macau and new zealand, for the last 21 days are exempted.
children aged six and below are also exempted from the new requirement.
at land checkpoints, only prs entering singapore will need to present a valid negative test result.
prs who arrive in singapore overland without a valid negative test result may be denied entry.
those who fail to comply with the new requirement may have their entry or re-entry permit cancelled.
travellers must be tested by an accredited or authorised health centre in the country or region of departure.
documentary proof is required and ica recommends that travellers ask for a copy of the pcr test report that is in english or accompanied by an english translation, contains the traveller's name, date of birth and passport number, and shows the date and result of the test.
mr fin chua, 30, who has been living in thailand for eight years, planned to fly back to singapore next week to visit his father, who lives alone.
after hearing about the pre-departure test requirement, the business owner considered moving his flight earlier so he could return before the measure kicked in.
ultimately, mr chua did not do so.
instead, he moved his flight back by two weeks to mid-june, citing the lengthy 21-day stay-home notice he would have to serve if he came back home now.
mr chua feels that the new requirement is onerous as it is not easy getting a covid-19 pcr test in bangkok .
he said a pcr test in the thai capital costs about 2,000 baht (s$85) at a government clinic and 4,000 baht at a government hospital, but it is hard for foreigners to get tested as thais get priority.
the wait to get tested at the clinics can take hours, he said, unless one pays more to join a priority queue, which means a wait time of 15 to 30 minutes.
a pcr test in bangkok costs about 2,000 baht (s$85) at a government clinic and 4,000 baht at a government hospital, but it is hard for foreigners to get tested as thais get priority.
photo: epa-efe
ms cheryl wong, 30, who works in the film industry in new york, said she did not mind the new requirement as getting tested for covid-19 in the us city is easy and there are free services.
"if i lived somewhere else with fewer testing options and undetermined turnaround times, i'd probably be more annoyed," added ms wong, who is returning home on may 31 to renew her us work visa and to see her family after being away for 11⁄2 years.
she noted, though, that the new test requirement did not appear to take into account singaporeans or prs who had already been vaccinated, or that individuals may still test positive even though they may no longer be infectious.
she said: "i'm pretty sure i'll test negative because i'm fully vaccinated and i am still cautious.
but there is that little bit of a 'what if'.
"mr samuel phua, 23, who is coming home next month after graduating from the sibelius academy in finland, is also somewhat anxious about the pre-departure test.
"it is allergy season here, and pollen allergies and covid-19 have symptoms that are quite similar.
i got myself tested recently and my results were negative, but there's always that sliver of doubt and worry that the next one may be positive.
"but mr phua also said that the new requirement is an important step towards ensuring the safety of singaporeans both abroad and back home.
dr ling li min, an infectious disease physician from rophi clinic, said the decision to require citizens and prs to take pre-departure tests before they are allowed entry would have been a difficult one for the authorities to make.
limited access to swab testing facilities in some countries means that singaporeans living in places where covid-19 is raging may not be able to return home.
but with the recent spate of unlinked community cases, dr ling said, the authorities now have several fires to fight and the new testing requirement will help to minimise the risk of the virus spreading in singapore.
this is especially in the light of the fact that the changi airport cluster singapore's largest active cluster with more than 100 cases was traced to staff interactions with a family who flew in from south asia.
while dr ling acknowledged that pcr tests may not pick up every single case, she said the mandatory pre-departure tests will at least help to identify those who are infectious and prevent the virus from spreading on board flights into singapore.
she added: "it is evident that a key vulnerability exists from when passengers disembark until they are taken to their stay-home notice facility.
this measure would further reduce the potential exposure to the virus for that part of the journey.
"professor paul tambyah, deputy director of the national university of singapore (nus) yong loo lin school of medicine's infectious diseases translational research programme, also said the new measure would protect changi airport staff.
"if this screening reduces the number of infected people passing through the airport even by a small proportion, it might reduce the risk to staff in particular to those who, for some reason or another, cannot take the vaccines," he said.
asked if the authorities should also extend the pre-departure test requirement to singaporeans and prs returning from lower-risk places, prof tambyah said it would be logical to mandate the test for everyone.
"taiwan and vietnam were previously considered low-risk places, as was the state of victoria in australia.
these classifications can change rapidly," he added.
the new measure would protect changi airport staff, says professor paul tambyah.
st photo: mark cheong
professor teo yik ying, dean of nus' saw swee hock school of public health, said implementing the new requirement may be more challenging than anticipated.
echoing a point made by prof tambyah, prof teo said not every jurisdiction will have commercial pcr testing capacity that is accredited and trustworthy.
hence, there is a need to ensure that singaporeans and prs who intend to travel to singapore are able to access proper testing.
otherwise, the testing requirement could be additional logistical hurdles for those returning as they would have to transit in cities where these tests are available, prof teo said.
he added: "it will not be useful if returning travellers simply pay for a substandard test or a forged negative pcr test certificate.
"there is also the issue of the government's responsibility towards citizens who test positive and cannot return home on a commercial flight.
moh said travellers who test positive on their pre-departure test should seek medical care and ensure that they have fully recovered and are non-infectious before travelling to singapore.
singaporeans who test positive for covid-19 while overseas and require urgent medical care can still return home via a medical evacuation flight or any other equivalent form of transport.
singapore management university assistant professor of law benjamin joshua ong noted that article 13(1) of the singapore constitution states that no citizen of singapore shall be "banished or excluded" from singapore.
the courts have not ruled on the precise meaning of the words "banished" or "excluded", he said.
"it is possible that those words mean that anything preventing a citizen of singapore from travelling to singapore would be unconstitutional.
on the other hand, a court might also hold that it is acceptable for certain requirements to be imposed on citizens before they can return.
.
.
"i think it is at least arguable that, if the restrictions are too onerous, then those restrictions would in substance amount to banishment or exclusion," he added.
prof ong said he has written to moh for more information about the precise legal basis for the new pre-departure test requirement.
he also suggested that exceptions be allowed, citing a hypothetical case of a singaporean abroad whose overseas visa or work permit may be expiring but cannot get access to a covid-19 test in time to return home, putting him at risk of overstaying.
however, smu law don eugene tan said that while at first glance it might appear that the pre-departure test requirement for singaporeans is in breach of article 13(1), this is not the case.
"while article 13(1) is not explicitly subjected to any derogations or restrictions, a citizen who is not in singapore voluntarily cannot be said to be banished or excluded," associate professor tan said.
instead, the testing requirement only means that a citizen will not be allowed to board a flight or ferry to singapore unless he has a negative covid-19 test result.
if the citizen does somehow make the journey to singapore, he will unlikely be denied entry, prof tan added.
"in other words, the pre-departure test requirement imposes a duty on the flight or ferry operator to ensure that all passengers travelling to singapore have the necessary negative test results based on their travel histories.
the constitutional guarantee provided by article 13(1) is in no way under threat. "
travellers should ensure that they have fully recovered and are non-infectious before travelling to singapore.
st photo: mark cheong
prof tambyah said there seems to be a reluctance to ban flights and replace them with evacuation flights like what was done with wuhan at the start of the pandemic.
hence, the new measure is a logical option despite its limitations.
prof teo said he believes that the singapore government will not leave any citizen in the lurch during a medical emergency, but stressed that individuals also need to bear responsibility should they choose to travel out of singapore while the pandemic is still raging globally.
he added: "this is really a reminder to singaporeans and prs that they should avoid unnecessary travel out of singapore during this period, and if they choose to do so, to ensure they have the necessary insurance coverage for covid-19 medical evacuation if infected.
"join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore a public servant has been arrested for allegedly leaking details about the suspension of activities for children and youth under covid-19 safe management measures before they were officially released.
the 32-year-old man was arrested on may 19 for wrongful communication of information under the official secrets act, the police said in a statement on sunday (may 30).
the police said they received a report on may 18 that information pertaining to the suspension of sport, physical activity classes and programmes for children and youth aged 18 and below from may 19 to june 13 had been leaked to the public.
the information was circulating via whatsapp before sport singapore's announcement on may 18. the man, who is a public servant and an authorised recipient of the safe management measures for sport and physical activities, allegedly shared the information via the messaging app on may 16 with members of a private chat group.
the recipients were not authorised to receive the classified information.
the information was subsequently further disseminated from that chat group, resulting in wider circulation of the message.
police investigations are ongoing.
the offence of wrongful communication of information carries with it a fine of up to $2,000 and imprisonment for up to two years.
the police have warned that unauthorised recipients should not further circulate confidential information received, as they may be similarly liable under the official secrets act.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.

a street vendor wearing a mask walks along a street in hanoi on may 31.
(representational image only. )
| photo credit: 
afp
  vietnam plans to test all nine million people in its largest city for the coronavirus and imposed more restrictions on monday to deal with a growing covid-19 outbreak.
people in ho chi minh city are only allowed to leave home for necessary activities and public gatherings of more than 10 people are banned for the next two weeks, the government announced.
prior to the order, the city, also vietnam's economic hub, shut down non-essential business last thursday when cases started to increase.
state newspaper vietnam news said the city authority is planning to test its entire population with a testing capacity of 1,00,000 samples a day.
the newspaper also said police had filed a case on sunday against the couple who head a protestant church mission for "spreading dangerous infectious diseases," citing poor health protocols applied at the premises.
at least 145 cases of coronavirus infection have been reported with links to the revival ekklesia mission, a protestant sect, and the city district of go vap, where the church is based, has been locked down.
vietnam has since banned all religious events nationwide.
the newspaper said church followers gathered in small space for singing and chanting without proper distancing and mask wearing.
ho chi minh city police said the mission has 48 registered members.
the report said the husband and wife accused in the case were responsible for leading and organising activities at the church.
they were not identified and are not under arrest.
since the end of april, a surge in covid-19 has spread to 31 municipalities and provinces in vietnam with over 4,000 cases, almost double the total number that the country reported since the beginning of the pandemic.
some recent patients in vietnam were infected with a hybrid of the virus variants first found in india and the u. k. , the health minister said on saturday.
nguyen thanh long said the hybrid might spread more easily and could be responsible for vietnam's recent surge.
viruses often develop small genetic changes as they reproduce, and new variants of the coronavirus have been seen almost since it was first detected in china in late 2019.  the world health organization categorised the u. k.  and the indian variants, along with two others first found in south africa and brazil, as "variants of concern" because they appear to be more contagious.
vietnam has vaccinated one million people with astrazeneca shots.
it has a deal with pfizer for 30 million doses to be delivered later this year.
it is also in talks with moderna that would give it enough shots to fully vaccinate 80% of its 96 million people.
our code of editorial valuesplease enter a valid email address.
printable version | may 31, 2021 9:18:10 pm | https://www.
thehindu.
com/news/international/covid-19-vietnam-to-test-all-nine-million-residents-in-ho-chi-minh/article34687230.
ece

© thg publishing pvt ltd. 

diplomatic affairs editor suhasini haidar discusses what led to the country's current vaccine crisis

diplomatic affairs editor suhasini haidar takes a look at the recent developments between india and pakistan's trade freeze
singapore — from tuesday (1 june), some 400,000 students from schools and institutes of higher learning (ihls) can register for the covid-19 vaccine as part of the national vaccination exercise.
those from the graduating cohorts taking their n, o or a-level exams or the equivalent in the second-half of 2021, numbering about 56,000, will be prioritised.
"these students will be the first to receive their invitations to be vaccinated so that they can have greater flexibility in scheduling their vaccination appointments in view of their upcoming national examinations," said the ministry of educationover the next two weeks, similar invitations will be progressively extended to other groups of full-time students, including the privately-funded schools, madrasahs and special education (sped) schools.
international schools will not be included in this vaccination exercise.
the pfizer-biontech vaccine will be administered to those aged 12 to 15, while older students can choose between the pfizer or moderna vaccine.
the interval between doses will be six to eight weeks.
the first shots for students are expected to be given on 3 june.
once they are vaccinated, the vaccination exercise will be opened to young adults aged 39 and below.
last month, the multi-ministry taskforce (mtf) on covid-19 authorised the use of vaccines in those aged 12-15.  studies and data have shown that the pfizer and moderna vaccines are effective and safe for individuals aged 12 and above, and aged 18 and above respectively.
students or parents/guardians of those under 18 will receive smses with a unique link for them to book appointments at any of the vaccination centres.
those below 18 years will only be offered appointment slots at sites with the pfizer vaccine.
parental or guardian consent will be required for these students as part of the booking process via the national appointment system (nas).
consent will be collected once, and apply for both doses.
parent or guardian accompaniment at the vaccination site is only required for children aged 12 and children in sped schools.
the main vaccination exercise for most students will be through the nas as this will give maximum flexibility in choice of dates and venues, and for students to get vaccinated early.
vaccinations for students will take place at community vaccination centres.
from 7 june, there will also be four dedicated moe vaccination centres, of which three will be at ite college campuses, jointly set up by moe and the health promotion board (hpb), and one at raffles city convention centre.
as all three ite campuses will have moe vaccination centres, ite students will take their shots on-campus, to make use of this dedicated capacity.
to facilitate access for students in sped schools who may find it challenging to visit a vaccination site, moh will deploy mobile vaccination teams to the schools to carry out vaccinations for all sped students aged 12 and above.
"while the covid-19 vaccination is not mandatory, we would like to encourage all medically eligible students to be vaccinated when the vaccine is made available to them.
this is our way of protecting not just our students and education institutions, but also their families and the wider community," said moe.
more information on the vaccination exercise for students can be found here.
stay in the know on-the-go: join yahoo singapore's telegram channel at http://t.
me/yahoosingaporerelated stories:possible easing of covid restrictions after 13 june if community cases fall further: lee hsien loongsingapore to make over-the-counter diy covid-19 tests available to residentscovid-19: vaccination bookings for singapore students to begin from 1 june'very unlikely' to resume phase 3 straight after 13 june: lawrence wongsingapore to allow alternative covid-19 vaccines for use by private sectorhousehold members of close contact of covid-19 case to be isolated immediately: pm leecovid vaccination guidelines eased for pregnant, breastfeeding women, cancer patientshousehold contacts of quarantined persons must self-isolate at home: mohsri lanka launched a criminal probe on sunday into a massive container ship fire that has swamped the island nation's coast with plastic pollution in an unprecedented marine disaster.
tonnes of microplastic granules have inundated the south asian country's famed beaches, forcing a fishing ban and prompting fears of ecological damage.
the ministry of health (moh) on sunday (30 may) confirmed the detection of 25 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,028.
《!》ut,!british prime minister boris johnson married his fiancee carrie symonds in a "secret ceremony" on saturday, uk media reports said.
whilst the typical homeownership journey for most singaporeans is 'upgrading' from an hdb flat to a private property (e. g.   homeowners who need more space for their growing families might move from their smaller condo to a larger hdb flat.
on the other hand, an older couple may also choose to move into a smaller hdb flat once their children have moved out.
a 51-year-old woman recovering from a brain tumour died after consuming traditional chinese medicine (tcm) which likely caused her acute liver failure, the state coroner found.
citi | wharton global wealth institute,the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
singapore residents will soon be able to purchase "do-it-yourself" covid-19 tests over the counter at pharmacies, said prime minister lee hsien loong on monday (31 may).
israeli and egyptian officials held talks in both countries sunday aimed at bolstering the cairo-brokered ceasefire that ended the latest deadly flare-up of violence between the jewish state and gaza's hamas rulers.
,,,,,.
gavin macleod, a veteran supporting actor best known for his role as an ever-smiling cruise ship captain on the 1970s-80s sitcom "the love boat," died saturday at the age of 90. he risked everything to give his baby girl a second chance at life this article, cannabis can mean death in malaysia.
for one dad, it also meant life for his daughter.
, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
hdb resale flats are a great alternative for those who can't wait years for a bto.
compare hdb resale flat prices and trends in this comprehensive guide to resale flats in singapore.
yahoo,,,『,』,!to enhance singapore's overall vaccine coverage and offer more flexibility, the government will allow private healthcare providers here to import and administer alternative covid-19 vaccines via special access routes (sars).
israeli opposition leader yair lapid on monday said many obstacles remain before a diverse coalition can be built to oust veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu but voiced hope it will achieve the "greater goal".
polish police said monday they were investigating a fake bomb threat that forced a ryanair passenger plane travelling from dublin to krakow to make an emergency landing in berlin.
$6,600「」,$100「」prime minister lee hsien loong appeared in court via video conferencing on monday (31 may) in a defamation suit against a writer from the online citizen, rubaashini who was absent from the hearing.
brazil's president jair bolsonaro promised the yanomami indigenous people in remarks released sunday that there will be no mining on their land unless they want it.
residents of a small french town laid cards and flowers saturday at the spot where a "very kind" and "gentle" policewoman was seriously wounded in a knife attack the day before, the latest in a spate of attacks on officers.
,《》《》,,!two people were killed and at least 20 wounded early sunday when three shooters fired indiscriminately into a crowd outside a concert in the miami area, police said, the latest shooting in a year that has seen a surge in both gun sales and gun violence.
hong kong police have arrested an elderly democracy activist as she made a solo demonstration over china's deadly tiananmen crackdown in a vivid illustration of the zero protest tolerance now wielded by authorities in the financial hub.
household members of any person identified as a close contact of a  covid-19 case will have to isolate themselves immediately, even if the person has not tested positive for covid-19 yet.
foreign workers say the us company made wrongful salary deductions, excessive long hours & held onto workers' passports.
american tire manufacturer goodyear tire & rubber co is facing accusations of unpaid wages, unlawful overtime and threats to foreign workers at its malaysian factory, according to court documents and complaints filed by workers.
in interviews with reuters, six current and former foreign workers, as well as officials in malaysia's labour department, say goodyear made wrongful salary deductions, required excessive hours and denied workers full access to their passports.
the department confirmed it had fined goodyear in 2020 for overworking and underpaying foreign employees.
one former worker said the company illegally kept his passport, showing reuters an acknowledgement letter he signed in january 2020 upon getting it back eight years after he started working at goodyear.
the allegations, which reuters is the first to report, initially surfaced when 185 foreign workers filed three complaints against goodyear malaysia in the country's industrial court, two in 2019 and one in 2020, over non-compliance with a collective labour agreement.
the workers alleged the company was not giving them shift allowances, annual bonuses and pay increases even though these benefits were available to local staff, who are represented by a labour union.
the court ruled in favour of the foreign workers in two of the cases last year, saying they were entitled to the same rights as malaysian employees, according to copies of the judgement published on the court's website.
goodyear was ordered to pay back wages and comply with the collective agreement, according to the judgement and the workers' lawyer.
about 150 worker payslips, which the lawyer said were submitted to court as evidence of unpaid wages and reviewed by reuters, showed some migrants working as many as 229 hours a month in overtime, exceeding the malaysian limit of 104 hours.
the foreign workers are claiming about 5 million ringgit ($1.
21m) in unpaid wages, said their lawyer, chandra segaran rajandran.
the workers are from nepal, myanmar and india.
"they are put in a situation where they are being denied their full rights as what is provided for (by law)," he said, adding that it amounted to "discrimination".
goodyear malaysia has said foreign workers are not entitled to the same benefits as they are not union members [file: tom brenner/reuters]goodyear, one of the world's largest tire makers, has challenged both verdicts at the high court.
the appeal decision is expected on july 26.  the verdict for the third case, over the same issues, is due in the coming weeks.
goodyear declined to comment on any of the allegations, citing the court process.
according to the court ruling last year, goodyear malaysia argued that foreign workers are not entitled to the benefits of the collective agreement because they are not union members.
according to the ruling, a union representative testified that foreign workers are eligible to join and are entitled to the benefits in the collective agreement even if they are not members.
the court agreed that the foreign workers' job scope entitled them to those benefits.
goodyear told reuters it has strong policies and practices relating to and protecting human rights.
"we take seriously any allegations of improper behaviour relating to our associates, operations and supply chain," a representative said in an email.
the union – the national union of employees in companies manufacturing rubber products – did not respond to reuters' requests for comment on the workers' complaints.
goodyear's malaysia operation is jointly owned by the country's largest fund manager, permodalan nasional berhad, which directed queries to goodyear.
workers said they faced intimidation from goodyear after they filed the lawsuits.
goodyear declined to comment.
"the company had different rules for different sets of workers," said sharan kumar rai, who filed one of the lawsuits and worked at goodyear in malaysia from 2012 until last year.
the foreign workers filed the first two lawsuits in july 2019.  soon afterwards, goodyear asked some to sign letters, without their lawyer's knowledge, that they would withdraw from the legal action – according to their lawyer, police complaints filed in october 2019 and a copy of the letter seen by reuters.
reporting a complaint to the police does not always result in criminal charges but can trigger an investigation.
industrial court chairman anna ng fui choo said in her ruling that the letter "was an act of unfair labour practice".
malaysia's labour department told reuters it had investigated and charged goodyear in 2020 over nine violations of labour laws, unrelated to the lawsuits, regarding excessive hours and wrongful salary deductions.
it fined goodyear 41,500 ringgit ($10,050), it said.
malaysia has in recent years faced accusations from its own human resources ministry and authorities in the united states of labour abuse at its factories, which rely on millions of migrant workers to manufacture everything from palm oil to medical gloves and iphone components.
malaysia is battling a rapidly escalating coronavirus outbreak that has strained the country's healthcare system.
company at centre of malaysia's biggest covid-19 outbreak fired worker who raised concerns about overcrowding.
economy shrank by a worse-than-expected 5.
6 percent last year, with lockdowns likely to lead to more pain, analysts say.
ministers have given approval to giving jab to millions of non-malaysians as it battles surging cases.
follow al jazeera english:
a church diet guru is believed to have died in a horrific plane crash that no one on board survived.
a small jet carrying seven people crashed into a lake in the us state of tennessee on saturday (local time) and authorities indicated all those on board were killed.
the cessna c501 crashed into percy priest lake near smyrna after taking off from a nearby airport about 11am (local time), the federal aviation administration (faa) said in a statement.
rutherford county rescue crews were still at the scene of the crash late on saturday and planned to work through the night, rutherford county fire rescue captain joshua sanders said at a news conference.
"our efforts have transitioned from a rescue effort to that of a recovery effort.
.
.
we are no longer.
.
.
looking for live victims at this point," capt sanders said.
county officials identified the seven killed in a news release late on saturday.
brandon hannah, gwen s.  lara, william (joe) lara, david l.  martin, jennifer j.  martin, jessica walters and jonathan walters – all of brentwood in tennessee – were presumed dead.
their names were released after family members had been notified.
ms lara is the founder of the remnant fellowship church and christian diet program the weigh down.
her husband, joe, portrayed the titular character in the "tarzan: the epic adventures" tv series in the 1990s.
ms lara's daughter elizabeth hannah had texted members of the church asking them to pray as the plane "had to go down for a controlled, quick landing", us news station wtvf reported.
the text message added on the plane with ms lara was the guru's husband william and remnant leaders david and jennifer martin.
brandon was also identified as ms hannah's husband.
earlier on saturday, officials confirmed search crews had found debris and identified parts of the airplane in the lake.
capt sanders said the crash appeared to have taken place entirely in the lake.
authorities also did not release registration information for the plane, which was heading from smyrna rutherford county airport to palm beach international airport.
the tennessee highway patrol told news outlets a witness saw the plane go into the water near a marina.
mystery and mix-up after child's body found near hiking trailgirl killed by stray bullet while jumping on trampolinewoman vanishes after getting in car at iconic tourist spotthe national transportation safety board and faa both had investigators at the scene.
smyrna is located about 32 kilometres southeast of nashville.
percy priest lake is a reservoir created by the j.  percy priest dam.
it is a popular spot for boating and fishing.
do you have a story tip?
email: newsroomau@yahoonews.
com.
you can also follow us on facebook, instagram and twitter and download the yahoo news app from the app store or google play.
a popular shopping centre food court is at the centre of victoria's latest coronavirus alert, with visitors being asked to get tested immediately and isolate for 14 days.
a 13-year-old girl has severe burns and is unable to talk after a viral social media challenge went very wrong.
n1   09:00-13:00   91 | n2    10:00-14:00  716explosive revelations have directly contradicted greg hunt's claims about the aged care vaccine rollout.
the officers have been praised for their kind gesture for a homeless man.
the american woman had a specific reason for considering australian fast-food superior to that in the us.
play for just 1 minute to find out why everyone loves this game!
no install requireda queensland woman who received two damaged parcels in two days is vowing never to use the australia post again.
more than a dozen others have received a health directive after coming in contact with the child.
woolworths has divulged how it managed to achieve the impressive environmental feat.
here is what whole mouth dental implants should cost you in your areashe had a big lotto win but try telling her that.
well, workers from the lottery office did and thankfully she believed them the second time.
an expert has made an extraordinary claim about how frequently leaks from labs, like the one in wuhan, occur.
it's something many of us encounter on a daily basis.
but where does it fit on your list of australia's 'deadliest' things?pvp and pve battles.
trading and crafting.
fight in your own build vehicles against real players.
register now and play for free!victoria has reported a further six locally acquired coronavirus cases on monday in addition to the five announced earlier in the day.
a restaurant owner has made his stance on covid-19 restrictions clear.
but some people say it's left them 'extremely disappointed'.
read more.
the girl was in a different aisle to her family when she was allegedly assaulted in a target store in the us.
let us handle your healthy meal prep, and deliver it to your door!
use code "summer15" to get 15% off on your first order!more covid exposure sites have been added including a number of stores and eateries in melbourne.
have you been to one of the new venues?victoria has reported another five new coronavirus cases as the statewide lockdown enters its fourth day.
boris johnson and carrie symonds have married in a secret ceremony.
this is the british prime minister's third marriage.
your dreams come true here.
check out men who want to chat and date join datemyage.
comthe two men seen in the confronting video are believed to be relatives of the covid-19 patient.
read more about the incident that ended in arrests.
china and covid will be on the top of the agenda for jacinda ardern and scott morrison.
nz signalled its support of australia in its china dispute.
read more.
a memorial for four sydney children killed by an out-of-control driver was torn down by vandals overnight.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore two more covid-19 patients have been linked to the anchorvale ntuc foodfare cluster, while another four have been linked to the hong ye group cleaners cluster, said the ministry of health (moh) on monday (may 31).
this brings the number of patients in the ntuc foodfare cluster up to nine, while the hong ye group cluster now numbers 21. the new cases in the ntuc foodfare cluster are a 33-year-old supervisor at hua zai hk style roasted delight rice noodle, who is the household contact of five previously reported patients, and a 33-year-old kitchen assistant at hua zai hk style roasted delights.
both work in outlets at 308 anchorvale road a coffee shop which has been closed for two weeks since sunday due to viral transmission among workers there.
the kitchen assistant also works at another outlet at 476d upper serangoon view.
the four new members of the hong ye group cluster are an 18-year-old cleaner at changi business park, an 18-year-old full-time national serviceman, an unemployed 16-year-old, and an 11-year-old pupil at new town primary school.
separately, an administrative worker at white sands primary school was one of three unlinked patients reported on monday.
she was fully vaccinated.
the other two are a 68-year-old man who is a manager at phoenix entertainment karaoke tv music lounge and a 72-year-old housewife.
the other 13 have been linked, making it a total of 16 community cases.
out of the seven not linked to either the ntuc foodfare or the hong ye group clusters, one is a nine-year-old girl at chua chu kang primary school who is a family member of previously reported cases.
she also attends student care at happy star learning hub student care and tuition centre.
there were also seven imported cases who were placed on stay-home notice on arrival in singapore.
four of the imported cases are singaporeans or permanent residents.
this adds up to 23 coronavirus cases confirmed on monday, taking singapore's total to 62,051. moh also said that the number of new cases in the community has decreased from 185 cases two weeks ago to 128 in the past week.
the number of unlinked cases in the community in a week has also decreased from 32 cases to 26 over the same period.
with 25 more patients discharged on monday, 61,444 patients have fully recovered from the disease.
a total of 223 patients remain in hospital, including two in critical condition in the intensive care unit, while 336 are recuperating in community facilities.
singapore has had 33 deaths from covid-19 complications, while 15 who tested positive have died of other causes.
read the full moh press release here.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
petaling jaya (the star/asia news network) malaysia's average covid-19 test positivity rate of 6.
89 per cent in the past week is higher than the threshold set by the world health organisation (who), said health minister adham baba on monday (may 31).
the positivity rate indicates the portion of positive covid-19 cases detected out of the total tests conducted.
higher positivity rates mean that more testing should be done, as it suggests that there are more people with the disease in the community who have not been detected yet.
the threshold set by who for adequate testing is a 5 per cent positivity rate.
datuk seri adham said that some states in the country even exceeded 10 per cent, with kelantan having the highest test positivity rate at 11.
84 per cent, followed by negeri sembilan at 10.
03 per cent.
other states and territories with high test positivity rates are labuan (8.
78 per cent), putrajaya (8.
61 per cent), selangor (7.
99 per cent), melaka (7.
95 per cent), kedah (7.
70 per cent), terengganu (5.
8 per cent), sarawak (5.
79 per cent), johor (5.
79 per cent), kuala lumpur (5.
72 per cent), penang (5.
66 per cent) and pahang (5.
44 per cent).
the states that fell below the who threshold are perak (4.
78 per cent), sabah (3.
83 per cent) and perlis (3.
79 per cent).
malaysia will go on a two-week stringent lockdown on tuesday (june 1) as part of a three-phase measure announced by prime minister muhyiddin yassin to battle the country's deadliest surge of covid-19 infections since the pandemic began early last year.
on saturday, it reported 9,020 new infections and 98 deaths from the coronavirus record highs in both categories.
meanwhile, an industrial vaccination programme, which will also cover foreign workers, will start soon, said the national covid-19 immunisation programme coordinating minister khairy jamaluddin.
he said that details would be announced next week.
on monday, mr khairy said: "vaccination for foreign workers will be covered under the industrial vaccination programme.
"under the programme, we will prioritise industries which cannot close or where work from home for the employees is not possible during this movement control order period.
"this includes foreign workers, who will be given vaccinations at the same time as local workers.
"mr khairy  also said that mobile covid-19 vaccination trucks will be used to vaccinate residents of kuala lumpur in certain areas.
he said he had discussed this with federal territories minister annuar musa.
"the outreach programme for vaccination using mobile trucks will go to areas such as ppr housing areas and construction sites which are still operating during the total lockdown period, " mr khairy said.
ppr refers to the people's housing project for the lower income.
mr khairy also announced the arrivals of around 400,000 doses of pfizer-biontech and around 600,000 sinovac vaccine doses this week.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
all headlinesnorth koreasportstop newsmost viewedkorean newspaper headlinestoday in korean historyyonhap news summaryeditorials from korean dailiesurl is copied.
(attn: updates with details, background in paras 6-10, 12-14; adds title in 4th para) seoul, may 30 (yonhap) -- south korea will receive the johnson & johnson (j&j) covid-19 vaccine for 1 million people from the united states this week following washington's pledge to donate vaccines for korean troops, prime minister kim boo-kyum said sunday.
it is nearly double the volume that u. s.  president joe biden vowed to provide, during a meeting with president moon jae-in earlier this month, to fully inoculate all 550,000 south korean service members.
"our military aircraft will bring the vaccine home (within this week) to inoculate military-affiliated members, including reservists," kim said, presiding over a government disaster management meeting.
"i'd like to express gratitude to president biden and the u. s.  government for the decision, which demonstrated the staunch korea-u.
s.  alliance," he added.
the korea disease control and prevention agency (kdca) said later that 1,012,800 doses are to arrive here early next month.
the vaccines will be administered to reservists, members of civil defense and those involved in the country's defense and foreign affairs who are 30 and older.
those under 30 will be excluded amid concerns over blood clotting.
volunteers will get a shot between june 10-20 after making reservations.
those eligible are 538,000 reservists, 3 million members of civil defense and around 137,000 people in the defense and foreign affairs circle.
of those in the defense sector, spouses and children of senior officials and civilian workers will also be eligible if they live together and are 30 or older.
of active-duty south korean troops, more than 116,700 in their 30s and older have already received astrazeneca vaccines, while some 414,000 soldiers under 30 are due to receive pfizer vaccines in june as planned, the kdca said.
some of the j&j janssen vaccines will be given to people leaving the country on essential business.
in april, south korea authorized the use of janssen's single-shot regimen as the country's third approved vaccine, though this type of vaccine is yet to be administered.
around 10 million americans, including members of the u. s.  forces korea (usfk), have received j&j's.
with the new delivery, south korea will have secured vaccines for 100 million people in a country of 52 million.
the vaccines are made by astrazeneca, pfizer, j&j, moderna and novavax.
around 10 percent of the population has currently received their first dose.
graceoh@yna.
co. kr(end)all newsnationalnorth koreamarketbusinessculture/k-popsportsimagesvideostop newsmost viewed korean newspaper headlinestoday in korean historyyonhap news summaryeditorials from korean dailieskorea in briefuseful linksfestival calendarweatheradvertise with yonhap news agency
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
kuala lumpur malaysia will shutter most of its factories and shopping malls under a stringent two-week lockdown that will begin on tuesday (june 1) to stem record covid-19 infections and deaths recorded over the past week.
people will be limited to travelling within a 10km radius of their homes, with only two people per household allowed to venture out for essential items, which include groceries and medicine, and essential services such as healthcare and banking.
senior minister for security ismail sabri yaakob said on sunday that only 17 essential sectors will be allowed to operate during the lockdown, which will closely resemble the first shutdown imposed between march and may last year, when most economic and social activities were barred.
economic activities that are allowed to continue include food and beverage businesses, utilities, transport, banking, e-commerce and the communications sector covering media, telecommunications and postal services.
under the new standard operating procedures that will come into effect on june 1, all sectors that are allowed to operate can open from 8am to 8pm.
food and beverage businesses will continue to operate under existing restrictions, which limit them to takeaways or deliveries from 8am to 8pm.
"there is no curfew, but i hope no one will be outside after 8pm, because there will be no economic activity after that time," datuk seri ismail said during the joint briefing with health chief noor hisham abdullah.
mr ismail said that the closure of most economic sectors will reduce the number of people leaving their homes for work from 15 million to just 1.
5 million.
most factories in the manufacturing sector will be closed, except for factories involved in making essential products such as food and beverages, and healthcare items.
however, these will be limited to operating at only 60 per cent capacity, and from 8am to 8pm.
factories were a key source of workplace clusters, after the government allowed them to remain open under a movement control order (mco) implemented earlier in may, citing economic concerns.
on sunday, mr ismail also announced tighter controls on travel permits granted to those who cross districts and states for work, saying these will expire on may 31.  new letters will be issued by relevant ministries for workers in the essential sectors that are allowed to operate from june 1.  the two-week stringent lockdown is part of a three-phase measure announced by prime minister muhyiddin yassin on friday to battle malaysia's deadliest surge of covid-19 infections since the pandemic began in early 2020. if the two-week lockdown succeeds, malaysia is expected to move to a month-long, more relaxed version of the mco that will allow most economic sectors to reopen while maintaining travel bans and prohibitions on social activities.
malaysia on saturday reported 9,020 new infections and 98 deaths from the coronavirus record highs in both categories.
cases dipped slightly to 6,999 new infections with 79 deaths on sunday, but active cases continued to climb as recoveries remained lagging behind new infections.
malaysia now has 78,017 active coronavirus cases, with 846 people receiving intensive care treatment at its hospitals, which the authorities have warned are strained and could soon be overwhelmed if cases continue to rise.
about half of those in intensive care are on ventilator support.
tan sri noor hisham had previously warned that the country might hit five-digit daily cases and log up to 13,000 daily infections by mid-june if the current infectivity rate of the transmission remains.
tan sri muhyiddin's perikatan nasional coalition partner umno and also former prime minister mahathir mohamad had previously called for a full lockdown to be implemented to stem the surge in infections.
mr muhyiddin has promised to deliver a fiscal relief package following this lockdown, but the government has yet to release any details of the aid package.
finance minister tengku zafrul tengku abdul aziz previously warned that a total lockdown could cost the country up to a million jobs.
mr muhyiddin last year said that the two-month lockdown in 2020 cost the country rm2.
4 billion (s$767 million) a day.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore a new initiative to pay random visits to employers and their foreign domestic workers has uncovered some instances of employers illegally holding on to their workers' passports and work permits.
the ministry of manpower (mom) has made 200 such checks since last month.
domestic workers and migrant welfare groups told the straits times (st) that the new measures, which include conducting more in-person interviews with maids, would help ensure decent living and working arrangements for them.
advocacy groups, however, said that mandating proper conditions would be even better.
in response to queries from st, an mom spokesman said: "thus far, employers have been supportive and allowed our officers to interview their migrant domestic workers (mdws).
"the initiative comes on the heels of a few cases where domestic helpers were badly abused.
in february, housewife gaiyathiri murugayan admitted to starving and torturing myanmar maid piang ngaih don, 24, leading to her death.
as at december last year, 247,000 work permits had been issued for foreign domestic workers, the mom spokesman added.
mom also said its officers are trained to look out for signs of abuse and pick up cues of stress and anxiety while speaking to domestic helpers.
each house visit typically lasts 20 minutes.
in-person interviews with workers are done by the centre for domestic employees (cde), an initiative of the national trades union congress.
since late 2017, the centre has interviewed an average of 2,000 randomly selected domestic workers a month, and it aims to expand the interviews to cover all first-time migrant domestic workers by the year end.
due to the covid-19 pandemic, the cde currently conducts interviews by video.
cde executive director shamsul kamar said: "common areas of concern raised by a small number of migrant domestic workers include insufficient rest and food; having their personal documents such as passports, work permits, contract being withheld from them; unsafe work environment, methods; or illegal deployment and salary issues.
these cases are reported to mom for further investigation.
"mr shamsul added that cde reports cases where domestic helpers are physically harmed by their employer to the police immediately.
indonesian domestic helper nelvin ganaga said she is happy to hear of mom's new initiative.
she said it is important for mom to ensure that domestic workers have sufficient time and space to talk to their families and make friends in singapore.
the 39-year-old experienced abuse with a former employer in 2015.  the employer's daughter and mother would step on ms ganaga when she slept at night and even spat in her food once.
the seven-year-old child would also pinch ms ganaga until she was bruised and continued to do so even after being scolded by ms ganaga's employer.
although ms ganaga asked to return to her agency, her employer refused and sent her back to jakarta instead.
ms ganaga then spent a month in batam before coming back to singapore, but it meant she had to pay new agency fees all over again to work here.
ms ganaga began working in 2016 for her current employer, with whom she has a good relationship.
she treats the family's children like her own, she said.
employers who spoke to st said they support the house visits as that is one way to ensure domestic helpers are being treated fairly.
ms ganaga's current employer, ms lau joon-nie, 50, said: "it's a step in the right direction to check on mdws' well-being and mental health, given that it's been a tough year for everyone and those of them who were due for home leave would not have been able to return.
"added ms lau, director of a non-profit organisation that focuses on the media industry: "helpers are not mind readers, nor did they grow up in the environment we did, so they cannot be assumed to know what we expect from them.
it helps to ask oneself: how would you want your employer to treat you if you were in their shoes?"
local migrant welfare groups said more can be done to support foreign domestic workers here.
the former president of transient workers count too (twc2), mr john gee, listed equipping each domestic helper with a mobile phone, easing their terms for transfer and giving them access to an employer's past record on hired help as other steps that can be implemented.
he also said the authorities should look into ensuring helpers have a mandatory day off each week which cannot be negotiated away for payment.
"a worker who goes out freely can seek advice from other workers, non-governmental organisations, her agents or mom and could leave her employers if she felt desperate enough.
in such cases, potential abusers might well think twice before acting, and workers could act in their own defence before any abuse escalated," he said.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
nadine chuathe new papermay 31, 2021a 68-year-old woman kept police officers at bay for almost two hours after locking herself in her ninth-storey flat at block 45 circuit road on saturday morning.
in response to queries from the new paper, the police said they received a call for assistance at 10.
23am that day.
"as it was assessed that the woman might pose a danger to herself, officers from crisis negotiation unit, special operations command and singapore civil defence force (scdf) responded to the incident," added the police spokesman.
a resident who lives three doors away and wanted to be known only as mrs rose, 52, said: "i was woken up by some commotion outside.
i looked out of the window and saw scdf officers rushing along the corridor.
"she added that the woman lives alone and often keeps to herself.
"i am concerned about how her sister is coping with all this.
her sister visits her regularly and told me she is always worried that there is no food in the house," said mrs rose, who runs an online business.
it is understood that the sister called the police when she went to visit and found the woman had locked herself in.
mr wang zhen ming, 60, who lives in the unit directly above the woman's, said he knew something was wrong only when scdf officers knocked on his door.
"they asked if they could hang something from my kitchen window as it would help in rescuing a woman.
"i can't believe i was in my living room the entire time and didn't hear any noise from downstairs," the warehouse clerk added.
scdf said it deployed a safety life air pack, and rescuers from the disaster assistance and rescue team were on standby as a precautionary measure.
photo: lianhe wanbaoa hawker, 58, who wanted to be known only as ms wong, was on her way to work when she saw scdf truck.
"i live a few of blocks away and my first thought was there was a fire.
but some residents told me a woman was sitting on the window ledge.
.
.
then she went back into her flat when the police arrived," she said.
the police said they gained entry to the unit at 12.
30pm.
"the woman was apprehended under the mental health (care and treatment) act.
no injuries were reported," added the police.
view more photos in the gallery.
get the new paper for more stories.
get more of stomp's latest updates by following us on facebook, whatsapp, twitter, instagram and youtube.
view the discussion thread.
view the discussion thread.
download the new stomp app today.
sph digital news | the straits timesall rights reserved | terms & conditions | data protection policy | advertise with ussph digital news / stomp / copyright (c) 2019 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore – the school of the arts (sota) has said it would investigate allegations of sexual impropriety by at least one of its teachers.
this came after the allegations on an anonymous instagram account claiming to name alleged sex offenders gained traction.
the account, durian.
dot, was created last week and has since been deactivated.
it had named and attached the instagram handles of more than 20 supposed male transgressors, listing their alleged criminal acts that include sexual assault and sex with minors.
a police report has been lodged against it and the police said they are looking into the matter.
they did not say what the reason cited for the report was.
among those accused are a local musician and at least one teacher from sota.
in a statement, the school called on victims to come forward.
it said: "we thank members of the public for drawing our attention to the various allegations concerning, amongst others, mr jason lim, a visual arts teacher of sota, on social media.
we are also aware of the allegations made by the durian.
dot instagram account which appears to now be deactivated.
"the account operated by getting victims to submit their experiences, later insisting that they were first-hand ones rather than hearsay.
doxxing, which is the publication of identifying information about an individual on the internet with malicious intent, is an offence.
the posts that garnered the most attention were those involving sota teachers and students.
a ceramics teacher was accused of sexually harassing, both physically and verbally, a 19-year-old while they were sharing a cab.
a student has also been accused of taking upskirt photos and creating a cohort-wide group chat for sharing such obscene images.
the school said: "sota firmly believes in and works to ensure a safe and secure environment for faculty and students.
sota does not condone harassment or abuse of any sort, whether online or offline, by or against any member of staff or student.
"it said reports made to the school would continue to be investigated appropriately and sanctions imposed when criteria are met.
those who wish to lodge a report can do so at whistleblow@sota.
edu.
sg, it said.
"please be assured that all reports will be treated with utmost seriousness, respect and confidentiality.
"it is not known who ran the durian.
dot account as the person or persons had insisted on anonymity.
they had declined to comment when approached by the straits times, but said in an instagram post that they had "weighed the pros and cons, coming to the conclusion that it is more important to highlight these behaviours than continue to keep mum".
some posts had been taken down during the week, either following suspicions of trolling or because the person involved had "taken the necessary action to avoid repeating the same behaviours".
"we are aware that this is considered doxxing and we can get reported.
.
.
for most cases, we have sufficient evidence on our end to work alongside the police, but we are not posting them in order to protect the victims' identities," one post said.
"for other cases, they may not be compelling due to the lack of evidence, so raising awareness is the next best bet.
our society normalises abuse much more than speaking up.
"join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
in a shocking incident, a woman admitted to slapping an 8-year-old girl in the face on an mrt train.
she apparently wanted the child to apologise for stepping on her foot before stepping off.
the woman has pleaded guilty on friday (28 may) to one charge of voluntarily causing hurt to the little girl.
image source: istockthe incident took place on 15 july, 2020, when the 8-year-old and her mother were at chua chu kang station.
after boarding the mrt train, the girl accidentally stepped on connnie soh's foot.
according to the straits times, the 45-year-old was talking loudly on her phone the did not hear the child apologise to her.
soh then confronted the girl's mother and asked her why her daughter did not apologise.
an argument began as the mother insisted her daughter did say 'sorry.
'when the girl and her mother were about to exit the train carriage as they reached yew tee station, soh slapped the child on her left cheek.
this was in an attempt to prevent her from leaving the train without apologising.
the 8-year-old began crying so her mother called the police from the station.
afterwards, the girl was taken to national university hospital where a doctor notes that she sustained a left cheek contusion or bruise.
the little girl was given a two-day medical certificate with an excuse from physical activity that year.
deputy public prosecutor joseph gwee urged the court to sentence soh with a fine of at least $5,000 for her actions.
her response to the incident was said to be an "objectively disproportionate one committed in a public place.
"soh also faces one other charge of using criminal force to poke the nose of the child's mother which will be taken into account during her sentencing.
she is scheduled for sentencing on 18 june.
image source: istockfor voluntarily causing hurt, an offender can face jail time for up to three years, fined up to $5,000 or both–in singapore.
but since the little girl was under the age of 14 years, soh faces double this maximum penalty.
so is slapping a child actually counted as abusive behaviour?
according to the ministry of social and family development (msf), any act that can cause an injury to a child can constitute physical abuse.
such actions that can cause bruises or cuts include:beatingshaking"excessive discipline"while there has been some debate on whether caning should still be used as a form of punishment, experts advise that parents use different ways to discipline their children.
instead of hitting or yelling at them, let your child off on a warning.
better yet, sit them down and check in on them, ask them about the things that may be bothering them and pushing them to behave rebelliously.
you can also use the incentive approach and ask them to finish a task in exchange for a reward.
this gives you as well as your child to cool off.
in addition, taking some time off is important for both parents and kids.
it will give you the opportunity to cool down and similarly, your kids will get a chance to introspect on where they have gone wrong.
at the end of the day, caning or yelling might be a short-term solution.
but in the long run, it can emotionally damage to your child.
don't let your impulse or anger overpower actions, which you might regret later.
singapore mum whatsapp groups ablaze with chats on cane shops and assessment books for kidsshocking!
5-year-old kindergartener repeatedly molested by babysitter's husbandthe post woman violently slaps 8-year-old child for stepping on her foot in mrt train appeared first on theasianparent your guide to pregnancy, baby & raising kids.
sri lanka launched a criminal probe on sunday into a massive container ship fire that has swamped the island nation's coast with plastic pollution in an unprecedented marine disaster.
tonnes of microplastic granules have inundated the south asian country's famed beaches, forcing a fishing ban and prompting fears of ecological damage.
the ministry of health (moh) on sunday (30 may) confirmed the detection of 25 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,028.
《!》ut,!british prime minister boris johnson married his fiancee carrie symonds in a "secret ceremony" on saturday, uk media reports said.
whilst the typical homeownership journey for most singaporeans is 'upgrading' from an hdb flat to a private property (e. g.   homeowners who need more space for their growing families might move from their smaller condo to a larger hdb flat.
on the other hand, an older couple may also choose to move into a smaller hdb flat once their children have moved out.
a 51-year-old woman recovering from a brain tumour died after consuming traditional chinese medicine (tcm) which likely caused her acute liver failure, the state coroner found.
???,.
,,,.
the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
singapore residents will soon be able to purchase "do-it-yourself" covid-19 tests over the counter at pharmacies, said prime minister lee hsien loong on monday (31 may).
from tuesday (1 june), 400,000 students from schools and ihls can register for the covid-19 vaccine.
citi | wharton global wealth institute,israeli and egyptian officials held talks in both countries sunday aimed at bolstering the cairo-brokered ceasefire that ended the latest deadly flare-up of violence between the jewish state and gaza's hamas rulers.
he risked everything to give his baby girl a second chance at life this article, cannabis can mean death in malaysia.
for one dad, it also meant life for his daughter.
, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
gavin macleod, a veteran supporting actor best known for his role as an ever-smiling cruise ship captain on the 1970s-80s sitcom "the love boat," died saturday at the age of 90. yahoo,,,『,』,!to enhance singapore's overall vaccine coverage and offer more flexibility, the government will allow private healthcare providers here to import and administer alternative covid-19 vaccines via special access routes (sars).
hdb resale flats are a great alternative for those who can't wait years for a bto.
compare hdb resale flat prices and trends in this comprehensive guide to resale flats in singapore.
israeli opposition leader yair lapid on monday said many obstacles remain before a diverse coalition can be built to oust veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu but voiced hope it will achieve the "greater goal".
$6,600「」,$100「」polish police said monday they were investigating a fake bomb threat that forced a ryanair passenger plane travelling from dublin to krakow to make an emergency landing in berlin.
prime minister lee hsien loong appeared in court via video conferencing on monday (31 may) in a defamation suit against a writer from the online citizen, rubaashini who was absent from the hearing.
brazil's president jair bolsonaro promised the yanomami indigenous people in remarks released sunday that there will be no mining on their land unless they want it.
all asset classes.
industry-leading prices.
user-friendly investing online.
residents of a small french town laid cards and flowers saturday at the spot where a "very kind" and "gentle" policewoman was seriously wounded in a knife attack the day before, the latest in a spate of attacks on officers.
two people were killed and at least 20 wounded early sunday when three shooters fired indiscriminately into a crowd outside a concert in the miami area, police said, the latest shooting in a year that has seen a surge in both gun sales and gun violence.
hong kong police have arrested an elderly democracy activist as she made a solo demonstration over china's deadly tiananmen crackdown in a vivid illustration of the zero protest tolerance now wielded by authorities in the financial hub.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
washington (afp) all seven passengers aboard a plane, including tarzan actor joe lara and his diet guru wife, are presumed dead after it crashed into a lake near the us city of nashville, said the authorities.
the small business jet crashed at around 11am local time on saturday (may 29), shortly after taking off from an airport in smyrna, tennessee, for palm beach, florida, rutherford county fire and rescue (rcfr) said on facebook.
the plane went down into percy priest lake, about 19km south of nashville.
the federal aviation administration confirmed that seven people had been aboard the plane, cnn reported.
by saturday night, operations had switched from search and rescue to recovery efforts, rcfr incident commander captain joshua sanders told a press conference.
"we are no longer in an attempt to (look) for live victims at this point, so we're now recovering as much as we can from the crash site," he said.
on sunday afternoon, rcfr said on facebook that recovery operations had found "several components of the aircraft as well as human remains" in a debris field about half a mile wide.
operations would continue until dark and resume on monday morning, rcfr wrote.
lara played tarzan in the 1989 television movie tarzan in manhattan.
he later starred in the television series tarzan: the epic adventures, which ran from 1996 to 1997. his wife gwen shamblin lara, whom he married in 2018, was the leader of a christian weight-loss group called weigh down ministries.
she founded the group in 1986, and then in 1999 founded the remnant fellowship church in brentwood, tennessee.
she is survived by two children from a previous marriage, according to a statement posted on the church's website.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
hanoi (reuters, xinhua) the authorities in vietnam's business hub ho chi minh city will conduct covid-19 tests on the city's 13 million people at a rate of 100,000 samples per day, state-run vietnam news agency (vna) reported, as it ramps up efforts to tame a spike in infections that started in late april.
"the city will prioritise testing high-risk people first, including workers in industrial parks and members of (a) religious mission," vna reported on sunday (may 30).
"ho chi minh city has done 50,000 tests so far.
to date, there are at least 62,000 people who came into contact with infected ones," it added.
in addition to the tests, the government has also announced on sunday social distancing measures in the city for 15 days starting from may 31. ho chi minh city has seen a rise in cases related to a religious mission that has recorded at least 125 positive tests, accounting for most of the city's infections, according to a government statement.
the country is also suspending incoming international flights to its capital hanoi from tuesday, the government announced on monday.
the announcement made no mention of domestic flights.
vietnam has been restricting the amount of inbound international flights since the start of the pandemic.
"the suspension will be in place until the end of june 7," the government said in a statement, noting that outbound flights from the city's noi bai international airport were not subject to the suspension.
after successfully containing the virus for most of last year, infections in vietnam have risen since late april, accounting for more than half of the total 7,168 registered cases among its population of 98 million.
it still has one of the world's lowest cases, with a total of 47 deaths so far, and the authorities seem determined to keep it that way.
"all events that gather more than 10 people in public are banned citywide, but the city is considering to lower the number of people to just five," the government said.
go vap district, where the revival ekklesia mission is located, will be under full restrictions, and people there will not be allowed to go out unnecessarily, the statement said.
ho chi minh city on friday shut shops, restaurants and other services, and suspended religious activities until further notice, the city said in a statement.
people aged 60 or older were encouraged to stay home, it also said.
the re-emergence of the virus with complicated clusters has prompted calls for the vietnamese government and the city's authorities to accelerate vaccinations.
in a letter to united states president joe biden on sunday, president nguyen xuan phuc suggested that both countries enhance cooperation in covid-19 vaccine research, production and technology transfer, the government said in a statement.
around 64,000 front-line workers among ho chi minh city's 13 million residents have been given at least one dose of a covid-19 vaccine, official data showed.
vietnam has received around 2.
9 million doses from purchases and via the international covax sharing scheme and is seeking to secure millions more from foreign vaccine makers for its inoculation campaign.
the country's locally produced covid-19 shot enters phase three human trials involving 13,000 volunteers in early june.
vietnam reported 61 new covid-19 cases on monday, raising the total confirmed cases in the country to 7,168, according to the ministry of health.
the new cases, which are all community transmissions, include 43 in the northern epidemic hot spot bac giang province, 15 in the vietnamese capital hanoi and three in the northern lang son province.
all of them are contacts of previously confirmed patients or linked to the clusters of infections in the localities.
as at monday morning, vietnam has recorded a total of 5,665 domestically transmitted covid-19 cases, including 4,095 detected since the start of the latest outbreak in late april, according to the health ministry.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore: prime minister lee hsien loong addressed the nation on monday (may 31) to provide an update on singapore's covid-19 situation.
mr lee's address was broadcast live on cna, itswebsite,facebook page,youtube channel​​​​​​ and on the prime minister's facebook page.
as of monday, singapore has reported more than 62,000 covid-19 cases and 33 deaths from the disease.
the country entered phase 2 (heightened alert) on may 16 amid a spike in covid-19 community cases.
social gatherings were reduced to a maximum of two people and dining-in at f&b outlets banned.
the tightened restrictions are to last until jun 13. mr lee said on monday that singapore is on track to bring the covid-19 outbreak under control, andrestrictions may be eased after jun 13if the situation continues to improve.
diy tests will soon be available over the counter at pharmacies as the country looks to test more widely to respond to virus mutations.
these can be administered by people who are worried that they may have covid-19, or by frontline workers who want to test themselves frequently, said mr lee.
people who appear well will also now be routinely tested in normal work, social or community settings to make these places safe, marking a shift in singapore's testing approach.
this "fast and simple" approach to covid-19 testing will be part of the new normal, said mr lee.
vaccination bookings to open for studentsfrom tuesday, vaccination bookings will open for students, starting with those who are taking their o-, n- and a-levels this year as well as special needs students.
other students aged 12 and above, including those in institutions of higher learning, will then be able to book their jabs.
even as singapore expands its vaccination programme, about 280,000 senior citizens aged 60 and above have not booked their covid-19 vaccinations.
to encourage this group to get vaccinated, they can now walk into any vaccination centre without a prior booking and get their jab on the spot, said mr lee.
"new normal"in the new normal, singapore residents will be mostly vaccinated, possibly taking booster shots yearly and being tested often, said mr lee.
"the countries which are united, disciplined and put in place sensible safeguards, will be able to reopen their economies, reconnect to the rest of the world, grow and prosper," said the prime minister.
"singapore will be among these countries.
more confident and resilient than before, and toughened by what we have overcome together and experienced together as one nation.
"downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore the rest areas for delivery riders and private hire drivers that were set up about a week ago in two punggol coffeeshops will be removed to prevent misuse.
these areas could become places where people congregate, and bring about community risk, said ms sun xueling, mp for punggol west smc, in a facebook post on sunday (may 30).
"i have been there a few times myself and seen some congregation of general workers which we had to rectify," added ms sun, who is also minister of state for education as well as social and family development.
the rest areas in the coffeeshops at block 308c punggol walk and block 269a punggol field were set up about a week ago.
they were intended for use by delivery riders and private hire drivers to rest and have their meal, said ms sun in previous facebook posts.
[embed]https://www.
facebook.
com/helloxueling/posts/5505061499568130[/embed]on sunday, she said that they can eat at open areas, such as void decks and parks, and that she had personally observed some of them taking their breaks alone in such places.
"and (the places are) safe, well aerated, away from crowds," she said.
ms sun also said the "pay it forward" initiative will continue at the two coffeeshops.
this initiative allows residents to pay for drinks which the riders and drivers can then redeem.
"there is also a box for us to express our good wishes to them and donate free masks for their use," said ms sun.
also read: no dine-in, no problem: a list of eating and rest spots for essential workers, drivers and frontlinersthis article was first published in the straits times.
permission required for reproduction.
hong kong is allowing vaccinated directors and senior executives of major listed companies to travel globally more easily, a significant relaxation of its onerous border curbs that's drawing backlash from the wider population for being elitist.
vaccinated senior executives from about 500 companies included in indexes like the hang seng and hang seng china enterprises can seek permission to travel in and out of the city without needing to follow the current quarantine requirement, hong kong's financial services and the treasury bureau said in a statement monday.
the clarification of a wider policy of exemption for vaccinated executives comes in the wake of a friday announcement that some vaccinated senior bankers can skip quarantine.
however, the move is likely to deepen public ire over the special treatment, as hong kong's traveler quarantine requirements are some of the strictest in the world and require people to pay for hotel room stays -- the supply of which is rapidly drying up for the summer months.
the current rules stipulate that everyone arriving in hong kong from outside china must isolate in a hotel for up to 21 days.
pressure is building on the government to drastically relax quarantine and other social restrictions for vaccinated people as incentives to re-open borders and to boost hong kong's low vaccination rate.
senior bankers can now skip hong kong's three-week quarantine"it's a step in the right direction.
is that enough?
we believe it is by far not enough," said frederick gollob, chairman of the european chamber of commerce in hong kong.
"with the combination of vaccination and ongoing testing, the hong kong government should further, on a broader scale, reduce the quarantine requirement on the way to reopening the city.
"the latest quarantine exemption is available to other firms from financial industries like banking, mobile payments, insurance, securities and futures intermediaries.
companies are allowed a limited quota of exemptions and the government will review applications based on criteria like where the executive is traveling from.
the executives must undergo testing and are required to stick to pre-approved itineraries.
an earlier version of the quarantine exemption policy has existed since last year for executives coming from mainland china.
singapore, asia's other major financial hub, does not grant exemptions from travel quarantine for business executives.
banks lauded the new announcement.
"we welcome the new measure providing more convenience to vaccinated senior executives when traveling to hong kong.
this helps encourage resumption of necessary business travel and brings business activities gradually back to normal, which is particularly important to hong kong as an international financial center," said a standard chartered plc spokeswoman in a statement.
hsbc holdings plc said in a statement, "while the pandemic has showed how much could be accomplished virtually, a measured approach to facilitate business travels to and from hong kong could help stimulate more economic activities across a range of sectors.
even within the business community however, some think that the exemptions are not being rolled out widely enough.
the american chamber of commerce, for example, said that the exemption should be "extended across sectors.
""all businesses have suffered, and all are keen to get safely back on the road again," said the chamber's president tara joseph in a statement.
however, the government has not signaled that it plans to significantly relax social-distancing rules for vaccinated people, such as mandatory outdoor masking, citing the low vaccination uptake.
some medical experts also continue to recommend social restriction remain in place in order to prevent another wave of covid-19, particularly as the vaccination rate is low, though local infection numbers have hovered at or near zero for weeks.
some critics argue, however, that it's precisely the lack of privileges for vaccinated people that is keeping the inoculation rate depressed -- just 13.
4% of hong kong's population of 7.
5 million has been fully inoculated, according to bloomberg's covid-19 vaccine tracker, far behind other finance centers like london and singapore.
chief executive carrie lam separately announced on the same day a new campaign to boost the city's slow inoculation rate by september, with measures such as paid leave for vaccinated civil servants and possible additional restrictions for unvaccinated citizens.
the government said it aims to announce further relaxations of rules for vaccinated people by june 10. now that the door has been open for quarantine exemption for some vaccinated people, the policy should be expanded to all fully inoculated people, said ben cowling, professor at the school of public health at the university of hong kong.
exemption is "an evidence-based measure given that vaccinated people are substantially less likely to be infected.
such a measure could also encourage greater vaccination uptake," he said.
the government has instead been leaning on businesses and institutions to encourage injections.
hong kong turns to businesses to fix foundering vaccine push still, the special treatment meted out to a small elite of executives is likely to further stoke public anger, already at high levels following more than a year of strict social restrictions and quarantine policies that have seen thousands forced from their homes to isolate in government-run camps.
the continuing quarantine policies for travelers also means that as vaccinated people in the u. s.  and european countries plan their summer travel, almost no one will be able to travel into hong kong without shouldering the prohibitive time and cost of quarantine.
ally, a hong kong citizen who currently lives in canada, said she's extremely upset that "as long as you are rich and powerful" you can skip the requirements that most people must observe.
ally, who asked that only her english name be used, said she has been unable to return to hong kong after her father died last year.
a single mother, she can't afford the cost of a 21-day quarantine, which would require her to be away from work without pay.
"you can imagine how infuriating it is that someone else is exempt because of money and i have lost my only remaining parent," she said.
the issue isn't just the time and cost of quarantine.
as the length of hotel isolation for those traveling from some countries, including the u. s. , has dropped to two weeks for vaccinated people, demand for rooms has skyrocketed.
numerous accommodations, especially those at lower price points, are fully booked through the end of the current quarantine period, which runs until june 19. the food and health bureau said monday that the supply of rooms would be increased from the current 8,300 to 10,000.  some hotels will open up more rooms for booking, it said.
— with assistance by denise wee, kiuyan wong, bruce einhorn, and alfred liu
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
a public servant has been arrested for allegedly leaking details about the suspension of activities for children and youth under covid-19 safe management measures before they were officially released.
the 32-year-old man was arrested on may 19 for wrongful communication of information under the official secrets act (osa), the police said in a statement yesterday.
the police said they received a report on may 18 that information pertaining to the suspension of sport, physical activity classes and programmes for children and youth aged 18 and below from may 19 to june 13 had been leaked to the public.
the information was circulating via whatsapp before sport singapore's announcement on may 18. the man, who is a public servant and an authorised recipient of the safe management measures for sport and physical activities, allegedly shared the information via the messaging app on may 16 with members of a private chat group.
the recipients were not authorised to receive the classified information.
the information was subsequently further disseminated from that chat group, resulting in wider circulation of the message.
police investigations are ongoing.
the offence of wrongful communication of information carries with it a fine of up to $2,000 and imprisonment for up to two years.
the police have warned that unauthorised recipients should not further circulate confidential information received, as they may be similarly liable under the official secrets act.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore a 95-year-old singaporean woman died from covid-19 complications on sunday (may 30).
she was confirmed to be infected with the coronavirus on may 17 when she was warded at changi general hospital for an unrelated medical condition, the ministry of health (moh) said on sunday.
the patient had not been vaccinated against the virus, and had a history of cancer, hypertension and hypothyroidism.
changi general hospital has contacted her family and is extending assistance to them, said moh.
meanwhile, five of the 19 community cases on sunday were linked to a new cluster at ntuc foodfare at 308 anchorvale road.
moh said it is investigating cases of covid-19 infection among people who work there.
"our epidemiological investigations have found that there is likely ongoing transmission at the coffee shop," said the ministry.
the coffee shop was closed to members of the public on sunday and will reopen two weeks later, on june 13, to break any potential chain of transmission and allow for deep cleaning of the premises, said moh.
the ministry will also offer free covid-19 testing for members of the public who visited 308 anchorvale road from may 13 to may 30 to "pre-emptively mitigate potential risk of wider, undetected community transmission".
all visitors to 308 anchorvale road within that timeframe are advised to monitor their health closely for two weeks from the date of their visit, said the ministry, which encouraged them to visit a regional screening centre or swab and send home public health preparedness clinic for a free covid-19 test.
there are now a total of seven cases in the cluster.
a 21-year-old vietnamese man who works as a kitchen assistant at hua zai hk style roasted delight rice noodle at 308 anchorvale road is among the five new cases linked to the cluster on sunday.
he is a household contact of several other cases in the cluster.
he was quarantined on saturday (may 29) and developed a cough on the same day.
he was tested for covid-19 the next day, and his result came back positive on the same day.
his serology test result is pending.
his colleague at the outlet – a 27-year-old malaysian man who is likewise a household contact of other cases in the cluster – also tested positive on sunday.
he had developed a loss of taste on friday (may 28), but did not seek medical attention.
he later developed a cough on sunday.
his serology test result is pending.
he had been quarantined on saturday as he had been identified as a household contact of case 63853.  this was a 33 year-old malaysian man who works as a kitchen assistant at hua zai eating house and was confirmed to have covid-19 that day.
two of the new cases in the cluster are also the men's household contacts.
they work as kitchen assistants at hua zai hk style roasted delights at 21 hougang street 51.  the remaining case in the ntuc foodfare cluster is a 29-year-old male permanent resident who works as a chef at rice garden at 308 anchorvale road.
he is a close contact of the 21-year-old vietnamese man and the 27-year-old malaysian man.
he developed a cough and fever on may 28 and sought medical treatment on the same day at a general practitioner clinic, where he was tested for covid-19.
his test returned positive the next day, and his serology test result is pending.
moh also announced another new cluster,  linked to a 67-year-old singaporean man who is a retiree and was confirmed to have covid-19 on may 26.  the three new cases in the cluster are all household contacts of the man, taking the total number in the cluster to four.
one of them is a 57-year-old singaporean woman who is employed by a&p maintenance as a cleaner at dhl supply chain advanced regional centre at 1 greenwich drive.
the other two cases are a 31-year-old singaporean man who works in an administrative role at the central provident fund board and has been working from home; and a 27-year-old singaporean woman who works as a retail assistant at stationery brand lamy's bugis junction and chinatown point outlets.
there are now 39 open clusters.
there were also five unlinked community cases on sunday.
these include a 37-year-old male indian national who works as a delivery driver with ccg logistics and a 22-year-old singaporean man who works as a warehouse assistant at keppel logistics.
there were six imported cases who had been placed on stay-home notice on arrival in singapore, moh said.
five of the imported cases are singaporeans or permanent residents.
no new cases from within workers' dormitories were reported.
overall, the number of new cases in the community has fallen from 182 two weeks ago to 136 in the past week.
unlinked cases in the community have also decreased from 39 to 25 over the same period.
read the full moh press release here.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
mv x-press pearl caught fire on colombo coast on may 20. sri lanka launched a criminal probe on sunday into a massive container ship fire that has swamped the island nation's coast with plastic pollution in an unprecedented marine disaster.
tonnes of microplastic granules have inundated the south asian country's famed beaches, forcing a fishing ban and prompting fears of ecological damage.
the singapore-registered mv x-press pearl has been smouldering on the horizon for 11 days after a blaze broke out as it was heading to colombo from gujarat, india.
the 25-member crew, who have already been evacuated from the ship, will be questioned on monday after a complaint was lodged by sri lanka's marine environment protection authority, police said.
last week, authorities said they believed the fire was caused by a nitric acid leak that the crew had been aware of since may 11.
"the captain and the crew were in quarantine, but health authorities have told us that we can question them from tomorrow," ajith rohana, a police spokesperson, told afp.
"we have already sent samples of polluted seawater and burnt debris from the vessel for a forensic report.
"authorities and the operators of the container ship say the fire has continued to burn, though it has been brought under control.
the ship's owners, x-press feeders, said the vessel's hull remained intact and there was no damage to its fuel tanks.
much of the ship's cargo, including 25 tonnes of nitric acid, sodium hydroxide, lubricants and other chemicals, appears to have been destroyed in the fire, according to officials.
sri lanka's marine protection authority (mepa) said the plastic waste from the burning ship had probably caused "the worst beach pollution in our history", and warned it could cause years of ecological damage.
fishermen have been banned from the 80-kilometre (50-mile) stretch of coast where the pellets have washed up.
fisheries minister kanchana wijesekera said the government would compensate fishermen for their expected losses.
at least 4,500 fishermen were affected at the fishing and tourist resort of negombo, officials from the roman catholic church in the area said saturday as they pleaded for financial aid.
priest sujeewa athukorale told afp on saturday that there were also fears of reduced demand for seafood from the area over contamination fears.
(this story has not been edited by ndtv staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.
)track latest news live on ndtv.
com and get news updates from india and around the world.
watch live news:follow us:.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
advertisement .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
beijing/taipei (reuters) china and taiwan traded more accusations on monday (may 31) about covid-19 vaccines, with beijing saying they should not be a political tool while taiwan's ruling party said china was the "black hand" preventing it from accessing shots internationally.
the two have sparred repeatedly since the pandemic started, over everything from china's transparency about the virus' spread to taiwan's lack of full access to the world health organisation, worsening already bad ties.
japan said on friday it would consider sharing covid-19 vaccines with other countries as a ruling party panel urged that part of its stock of astrazeneca doses be provided to taiwan, which is considered by china as a breakaway province.
taiwan welcomed the news.
taiwan is battling a spike in domestic infections and has vaccinated less than 2 per cent of its people, while japan has secured more than 400 million doses, or double what its adult population needs.
speaking in beijing, chinese foreign ministry spokesman wang wenbin said it had "noted" that japan cannot even guarantee its own people enough vaccines at the moment, and that many people in taiwan had doubts about the offer.
"i want to emphasise that vaccine assistance should return to the original purpose of saving lives, and should not be reduced to a tool for political self-interest," he said.
china has offered taiwan vaccines, but taipei says made-in-china shots have too many safety concerns.
taiwan has also accused china of blocking a deal with germany's biontech that beijing denies.
taiwan's ruling democratic progressive party said china's comment last week that taipei would not succeed in using vaccines to seek its independence showed that beijing was the "black hand behind the scenes" preventing taiwan from getting access to vaccines internationally.
the wide use of vaccines is essential to ultimately controlling the virus, it said.
"however, in the face of the pandemic, china has used it as a political bargaining chip to prevent taiwan from obtaining vaccines from the world," the party added.
china considers democratically ruled taiwan its own territory.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore: more than 400,000 students aged 12 and above will be invited to register for the covid-19 vaccine from jun 1, announced minister for education chan chun sing on monday (may 31).
this comes after the pfizer-biontech vaccine was approved by the health sciences authority for those aged 12 to 15 earlier this month.
bookings will open on jun 1, with the earliest slots for vaccination available from jun 3, said mr chan.
the exercise will start with graduating cohorts from secondary schools and at the pre-university levels, in particular, students sitting for the gce n-, o- or a-level examinations later this year, said the ministry of education (moe) in a separate press release.
"these students will be the first to receive their invitations to be vaccinated so that they can have greater flexibility in scheduling their vaccination appointments in view of their upcoming national examinations," the press release read.
over the next two weeks, the remaining full-time students in schools and institutes of higher learning will receive their invitations to register for the vaccine, said the education ministry.
this includes privately-funded schools, madrasahs and special education schools, said moe in the press release.
privately-funded schools comprise anglo-chinese school (international), st.  joseph's institution international high school and hwa chong international school.
students below 18 will only be offered the pfizer-biontech covid-19 vaccine, while those aged 18 and above can opt for either vaccines from pfizer-biontech or moderna, said the education ministry.
for both vaccines, the interval between the first and second dose will be six to eight weeks, said moe in a briefing earlier on monday.
eligible students aged 18 and above as well as parents of children below 18 will progressively receive smses with a unique registration link, said the ministry.
parents of students in graduating cohorts who do not receive the sms by jun 3 should contact their children's school for assistance.
"schools will also be reaching out to parents of students in mainstream primary and secondary schools separately with additional details on their vaccinations.
in general, students who are in schools and the ihls should receive their smses by the end of the second week of june," the factsheet read.
sms invites will only be sent to parents or guardians of children who are 12 years old as of jun 1.  those whose 12th birthday falls after jun 1 will be invited for vaccination at a later date, said moe.
parental or guardian consent is required for students below 18, as part of the booking process for the vaccination slots through the national appointment system, said the ministry.
consent given via the system will be collected once and will apply for both doses of the vaccine.
parents or guardians of students aged 13 and above do not need to accompany the child to the vaccination centre while children who are 12 years old and all students in special education schools must be accompanied by a parent or guardian.
eligible students can get vaccinated at community vaccination centres.
there will also be four dedicated moe vaccination centres set up at raffles city convention centre, ite college central, ite college east and ite college west, said moe.
ite will arrange for their students to take their vaccinations on campus to make use of the dedicated capacity, the ministry added.
each ite centre can take up to 1,600 vaccination slots per day, "comparable" to community vaccination centres, while raffles convention centre can take up to 2,000 slots per day, said moe in a briefing earlier on monday.
the ministry will also deploy a mobile vaccination team to special education schools to carry out the vaccinations for all eligible special education students, to "facilitate access" for students who might find it challenging to visit a vaccination centre, it said.
the vaccination exercise for students is expected to be completed by august, said moe at the briefing earlier on monday.
"all medically eligible individuals are encouraged to consider getting vaccinated when the vaccination is offered to them.
and we would like to thank all parents for working closely with our educators and schools to keep our children safe," said mr chan.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore — health minister ong ye kung on monday (31 may) outlined singapore's fresh approach to covid-19 testing going forward.
(video courtesy of mediacorp)related story:singapore to make over-the-counter diy covid-19 tests available to residentssri lanka launched a criminal probe on sunday into a massive container ship fire that has swamped the island nation's coast with plastic pollution in an unprecedented marine disaster.
tonnes of microplastic granules have inundated the south asian country's famed beaches, forcing a fishing ban and prompting fears of ecological damage.
the ministry of health (moh) on sunday (30 may) confirmed the detection of 25 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,028.
《!》ut,!british prime minister boris johnson married his fiancee carrie symonds in a "secret ceremony" on saturday, uk media reports said.
whilst the typical homeownership journey for most singaporeans is 'upgrading' from an hdb flat to a private property (e. g.   homeowners who need more space for their growing families might move from their smaller condo to a larger hdb flat.
on the other hand, an older couple may also choose to move into a smaller hdb flat once their children have moved out.
a 51-year-old woman recovering from a brain tumour died after consuming traditional chinese medicine (tcm) which likely caused her acute liver failure, the state coroner found.
smart,5%!$1,600,!the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
singapore residents will soon be able to purchase "do-it-yourself" covid-19 tests over the counter at pharmacies, said prime minister lee hsien loong on monday (31 may).
from tuesday (1 june), 400,000 students from schools and ihls can register for the covid-19 vaccine.
???,.
,,,.
israeli and egyptian officials held talks in both countries sunday aimed at bolstering the cairo-brokered ceasefire that ended the latest deadly flare-up of violence between the jewish state and gaza's hamas rulers.
he risked everything to give his baby girl a second chance at life this article, cannabis can mean death in malaysia.
for one dad, it also meant life for his daughter.
, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
gavin macleod, a veteran supporting actor best known for his role as an ever-smiling cruise ship captain on the 1970s-80s sitcom "the love boat," died saturday at the age of 90.
$6,600「」,$100「」to enhance singapore's overall vaccine coverage and offer more flexibility, the government will allow private healthcare providers here to import and administer alternative covid-19 vaccines via special access routes (sars).
hdb resale flats are a great alternative for those who can't wait years for a bto.
compare hdb resale flat prices and trends in this comprehensive guide to resale flats in singapore.
israeli opposition leader yair lapid on monday said many obstacles remain before a diverse coalition can be built to oust veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu but voiced hope it will achieve the "greater goal".
,,,,,.
polish police said monday they were investigating a fake bomb threat that forced a ryanair passenger plane travelling from dublin to krakow to make an emergency landing in berlin.
prime minister lee hsien loong appeared in court via video conferencing on monday (31 may) in a defamation suit against a writer from the online citizen, rubaashini who was absent from the hearing.
brazil's president jair bolsonaro promised the yanomami indigenous people in remarks released sunday that there will be no mining on their land unless they want it.
yahoo,,,『,』,!residents of a small french town laid cards and flowers saturday at the spot where a "very kind" and "gentle" policewoman was seriously wounded in a knife attack the day before, the latest in a spate of attacks on officers.
two people were killed and at least 20 wounded early sunday when three shooters fired indiscriminately into a crowd outside a concert in the miami area, police said, the latest shooting in a year that has seen a surge in both gun sales and gun violence.
hong kong police have arrested an elderly democracy activist as she made a solo demonstration over china's deadly tiananmen crackdown in a vivid illustration of the zero protest tolerance now wielded by authorities in the financial hub.
singapore taiwanese actor kai ko has said that he wanted to marry singer elva hsiao, but that he liked singer tia lee the most.
in an instagram live broadcast on may 28, he was asked by singer jumi wang in a game of truth or dare?
which former girlfriend he had loved the most.
ko, 29, laughed and joked that his agency would "kill" him.
he then said he had loved all of his former girlfriends.
"the one whom i wanted to marry was miss hsiao," he said.
"but up till now, the one i liked most was miss lee.
"ko said they broke up because he was "not good enough", without elaborating.
lee, 36, was once known as "little vivian hsu" for her likeness to the singer.
the former member of now-defunct girl group dream girls has since focused on her career in china.
her manager told the media that she declined to comment on ko's disclosure.
hsiao, 41, who released her debut mandopop album in 1999, said that ko was just being frank.
she is currently dating budding actor justin huang, who is 16 years her junior.
[[nid:124380]]ko has been linked to several female celebrities since he shot to fame in his debut movie, you are the apple of my eye (2011).
the film is based on director giddens ko's semi-autobiographical novel of the same name.
kai ko admitted to dating hsiao in 2012 before they broke up in 2014.  she later said that they broke up because they had different values and outlooks on life.
the actor was linked to lee between 2014 and 2017, a period which coincided with his career being derailed after his drug arrest in beijing in august 2014.
[[nid:137099]]ko served two weeks in detention, while hong kong actor jaycee chan was sentenced to six months' jail for sheltering drug users.
lee did not distance herself from ko and even provided encouragement to him then.
other celebrities romantically linked to the actor include late tycoon stanley ho's daughter laurinda ho, south korean model irene kim and fashion boutique owner rigel davis.
ko has starred only in a handful of movies since his arrest.
they include myanmar-born taiwanese director midi z's the road to mandalay (2016); and a choo (2020), which was supposed to be released in 2014 but was delayed by his arrest.
the fantasy romance drama is based on another of giddens ko's novels.
this article was first published in the straits times.
permission required for reproduction.
this general view shows the wuhan institute of virology in wuhan, in china's central hubei province on 3 february 2021, as members of the world health organization (who) team investigating the origins of the covid-19 coronavirus, visit/afp/hector retamal.
the theory that covid-19 might be the result of scientific experiments has thrown a spotlight on the work of the world's most secure biolabs.
while the evidence linking sars-cov-2 to the wuhan institute of virology in china is strictly circumstantial, a number of experts want tougher controls on such facilities over fears that accidental leaks could touch off the next pandemic.
here's what you should know.
the wuhan lab belongs to the most secure class, commonly referred to as biosafety level 4, or bsl4.
these are built to work safely and securely with the most dangerous bacteria and viruses that can cause serious diseases for which there are no known treatment or vaccines.
"there are hvac filtration systems, so that the virus can't escape through exhaust; any waste water that leaves the facility is treated with either chemicals or high temperatures to make sure that there's nothing alive," gregory koblentz, director of the biodefense graduate program at george mason university, told afp.
the researchers themselves are highly trained and wear hazmat suits.
there are 59 such facilities across the world, according to a report koblentz co-authored that was released this week.
"there are no binding international standards for safe, secure, and responsible work on pathogens," the report, called mapping maximum biological containment labs globally, said.
accidents can happen, sometimes at the top tier facilities, and much more frequently at lower rung labs of which there are thousands.
human h1n1 virus — the same flu that caused the 1918 pandemic — leaked in 1977 in the soviet union and china and spread worldwide.
in 2001, a mentally disturbed employee at a us biolab mailed out anthrax spores across the country, killing five people.
two chinese researchers exposed to sars in 2004 spread the disease to others, killing one.
in 2014, a handful of smallpox vials were uncovered during an food and drug administration office move.
lynn klotz, a senior science fellow at the center for arms control and non-proliferation, has been sounding the alarm for many years about the public safety threats posed by such facilities.
"human errors constitute over 70 percent of the errors in laboratories," he told afp, adding that us researchers have to rely on data from freedom of information requests to learn of these incidents.
there is disagreement between the us government, which funded bat coronavirus research in wuhan, and some independent scientists, about whether this work was controversial "gain of function" (gof) research.
gof research entails modifying pathogens to make them more transmissible, deadlier, or better able to evade treatment and vaccines — all to learn how to fight them better.
this field has long been contentious.
debate reached a fever pitch when two research teams in 2011 showed they could make bird flu transmissible between mammals.
harvard epidemiologist marc lipsitch told afp he was concerned "that it would create a strain of virus that if it infected a laboratory worker could not just kill that laboratory worker.
.
.
but also cause a pandemic.
""the research is not required and does not contribute to the development of drugs or vaccines," added molecular biologist richard ebright of rutgers university, one of the staunchest opponents of this kind of research.
in 2014 the us government announced a pause in federal funding for such work, which gave way in 2017 to a framework that would consider each application on a case-by-case basis.
but the process has been criticized as lacking transparency and credibility.
as late as last year, a nonprofit received funding from the us on research to "predict spillover potential" of bat coronavirus to humans in wuhan.
questioned by congress this week, francis collins and anthony fauci of the national institutes of health denied this amounted to gain of function research, but ebright said it clearly does.
none of this means that covid-19 definitely leaked from a lab — in fact there is no hard scientific evidence in favor of natural origin or lab accident scenario, said ebright.
but there are certain lines of circumstantial evidence in favor of the latter.
for instance, wuhan is around 1,000 miles north of bat caves that harbor the ancestor virus, well out of the animals' flight range.
scientists from wuhan were however known to be carrying out routine trips to those caves to take samples.
alina chan, a molecular biologist from the broad institute, said there were no signs of risky pathogen research dying down in the wake of the pandemic — in fact "it's possibly expanded.
"last year, chan published research showing that, unlike sars, sars-cov-2 was not evolving fast when it was first detected in humans — another piece of circumstantial evidence that could point to lab origin.
chan considers herself a "fence-sitter" on the competing hypotheses, but does not favor banning risky research, fearing it would then go underground.
one solution "might just be as simple as moving these research institutes out into extremely remote areas.
.
.
where you have to quarantine for two weeks before we re-enter in human society," she said.
— afp © 2006 2021 the online citizen© 2006 2021 the online citizen
shanghai (reuters) -china on monday reported a sudden surge in covid-19 infections in the country's south, with 18 new local cases on may 30 in the city of guangzhou, causing a flurry of flight cancellation.
of the 27 new coronavirus cases reported by the national health authority in its daily updates, only 7 infections were imported, with the remainder originating in guangdong province.
out of the 20 new locally confirmed patients on may 30, 18 were found in guangzhou city and two in foshan city, health authorities in guangdong province said on monday.
as of 11:40 am, a total of 519 flights at guangzhou baiyun international airport were cancelled, accounting for 37% of total flights on monday, according to aviation data provider variflight.
guangzhou baiyun international airport, which carried 43.
8 million passengers last year, was the world's busiest airport in the midst of a global pandemic.
people leaving the city from airports, train stations and shuttle bus stations need to show proof of a negative covid-19 test within three days, unless they were transiting, the city said in a statement late on sunday.
on saturday, guangzhou government ordered residents on five streets in the city's liwan district to remain at home and suspended non-essential activities, while entertainment venues and markets were closed.
recent infections in the city were contracted with a fast-spreading virus strain detected in india according to genome sequencing results, chen bin, deputy director at the city's municipal health commission, told a press conference on sunday.
china also reported 19 new asymptomatic infections, which china does not classify as confirmed cases, on may 30, compared with 22 a day earlier.
as of may 30, china had a total of 91,099 confirmed covid-19 cases, while its death toll remained unchanged at 4,636.
(reporting by josh horwitz, roxanne liu, stella qiu and lusha zhang; editing by himani sarkar and michael perry)sri lanka launched a criminal probe on sunday into a massive container ship fire that has swamped the island nation's coast with plastic pollution in an unprecedented marine disaster.
tonnes of microplastic granules have inundated the south asian country's famed beaches, forcing a fishing ban and prompting fears of ecological damage.
the ministry of health (moh) on sunday (30 may) confirmed the detection of 25 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,028.
《!》ut,!british prime minister boris johnson married his fiancee carrie symonds in a "secret ceremony" on saturday, uk media reports said.
whilst the typical homeownership journey for most singaporeans is 'upgrading' from an hdb flat to a private property (e. g.   homeowners who need more space for their growing families might move from their smaller condo to a larger hdb flat.
on the other hand, an older couple may also choose to move into a smaller hdb flat once their children have moved out.
a 51-year-old woman recovering from a brain tumour died after consuming traditional chinese medicine (tcm) which likely caused her acute liver failure, the state coroner found.
n1   09:00-13:00   91 | n2    10:00-14:00  716the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
singapore residents will soon be able to purchase "do-it-yourself" covid-19 tests over the counter at pharmacies, said prime minister lee hsien loong on monday (31 may).
from tuesday (1 june), 400,000 students from schools and ihls can register for the covid-19 vaccine.
citi | wharton global wealth institute,israeli and egyptian officials held talks in both countries sunday aimed at bolstering the cairo-brokered ceasefire that ended the latest deadly flare-up of violence between the jewish state and gaza's hamas rulers.
he risked everything to give his baby girl a second chance at life this article, cannabis can mean death in malaysia.
for one dad, it also meant life for his daughter.
, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
gavin macleod, a veteran supporting actor best known for his role as an ever-smiling cruise ship captain on the 1970s-80s sitcom "the love boat," died saturday at the age of 90. polyu speed .
4,3. , .
,630. to enhance singapore's overall vaccine coverage and offer more flexibility, the government will allow private healthcare providers here to import and administer alternative covid-19 vaccines via special access routes (sars).
hdb resale flats are a great alternative for those who can't wait years for a bto.
compare hdb resale flat prices and trends in this comprehensive guide to resale flats in singapore.
israeli opposition leader yair lapid on monday said many obstacles remain before a diverse coalition can be built to oust veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu but voiced hope it will achieve the "greater goal".
$2000$150,「hsbc2021」.
1,5,yohopolish police said monday they were investigating a fake bomb threat that forced a ryanair passenger plane travelling from dublin to krakow to make an emergency landing in berlin.
prime minister lee hsien loong appeared in court via video conferencing on monday (31 may) in a defamation suit against a writer from the online citizen, rubaashini who was absent from the hearing.
brazil's president jair bolsonaro promised the yanomami indigenous people in remarks released sunday that there will be no mining on their land unless they want it.
spinningfields,,, 65-6,,!residents of a small french town laid cards and flowers saturday at the spot where a "very kind" and "gentle" policewoman was seriously wounded in a knife attack the day before, the latest in a spate of attacks on officers.
two people were killed and at least 20 wounded early sunday when three shooters fired indiscriminately into a crowd outside a concert in the miami area, police said, the latest shooting in a year that has seen a surge in both gun sales and gun violence.
hong kong police have arrested an elderly democracy activist as she made a solo demonstration over china's deadly tiananmen crackdown in a vivid illustration of the zero protest tolerance now wielded by authorities in the financial hub.
jerusalem: israeli nationalist hardliner naftali bennett said on sunday (may 30) that he would join apotential coalition governmentthat could end the rule of the country's longest-serving leader, prime minister benjamin netanyahu.
lawmakers opposed to right-wing netanyahu have been in intense talks ahead of a wednesday deadline, as a ceasefire held following the latestdeadly military conflict with hamasin the gaza strip.
netanyahu, 71, who faces trial on fraud, bribery and breach of trust charges, which he denies, has clung to power throughout a period of political turmoil that has seen four inconclusive elections in under two years.
a march vote saw netanyahu's likud party gain the most seats, but he again failed to form a government.
opposition leader and former tv anchor yair lapid now has until wednesday evening to build a rival coalition.
lapid, 57, is seeking a diverse alliance which the israeli media has dubbed a bloc for "change", which would include bennett as well as arab-israeli lawmakers.
in his determination to bring down the hawkish prime minister, lapid has offered to share power and let bennett, 49, serve the first term in a rotating premiership.
bennett, after meeting members of his religious-nationalist yamina party, said on sunday: "i will do everything to form a national unity government with my friend yair lapid.
"lapid and bennett's parties started talks on sunday night to formalise the deal, they said in a statement.
religious-nationalist yamina won seven seats in mar 23 elections, but one member has refused to join an anti-netanyahu coalition.
netanyahu, who has been in office for 12 consecutive years after an earlier three-year term, in his own televised address minutes later lashed out at the plan, calling it "a danger for the security of israel".
"desperate position"he had earlier on sunday tried to cling to power by offering his own, last-ditch power-sharing agreement to several former allies including bennett.
he warned that israel would otherwise be ruled by a dangerous "left-wing" alliance.
lapid has until 11.
59 pm local time on wednesday (4.
59am on thursday, singapore time) to build a coalition of at least 61 deputies, a majority in the 120-seat knesset.
a lapid government would also include the centrist blue and white party of netanyahu's rival benny gantz and the hawkish new hope party of his former ally gideon saar.
avigdor lieberman's pro-settlement yisrael beitenu party as well as historically powerful labour and the dovish meretz party would also join.
the shaky arrangement would need the backing of some arab-israeli lawmakers of palestinian descent in order to pass a confirmation vote in parliament.
the intense talks follow weeks of escalating tensions between israel and the palestinians, including a deadly 11-day exchange of rocket fire from gaza and devastating israeli airstrikes.
the war with hamas that ended with a may 21 truce, as well as violence in the occupied west bank and in mixed jewish-arab towns in israel, initially appeared to leave netanyahu more likely to hold onto power.
but political scientist gayil talshir at hebrew university told afp on sunday that israel was now "closer than ever" to a coalition of change, adding: "netanyahu is in a desperate position.
"netanyahu's likud party won 30 seats in the march elections, but failed to form a governing coalition after his far-right partners refused to sit with arab factions or receive their support.
lapid, whose party won 17 seats, was then given four weeks to form a government.
netanyahu had previously pushed for yet another election israel's fifth in a little more than two years.
more elections?on sunday, netanyahu offered his own proposal of a rotation agreement with bennett and saar.
but saar on twitter said that he remained committed to "replacing the netanyahu regime".
netanyahu in a video then called on saar and bennett to "come now, immediately" to meet him and join a three-way rotation government, warning that they were in a "crucial moment for the security, character and future of the state of israel".
lapid's "change" coalition also still faced several obstacles.
some right-wing lawmakers object to a partnership with politicians from israel's arab minority, who make up about a fifth of the population.
the recent gaza conflict sparked inter-communal clashes between jewish and arab israelis in mixed cities.
arab politicians have also been divided about joining a government headed by bennett, who supports expanding israeli settlements in the occupied west bank, where palestinians hope to create a state.
even with support from an arab party, a new coalition in israel is unlikely to reverse years of israeli settlement construction or bring peace any time soon with hamas in gaza.
if the anti-netanyahu camp does not manage to form a government on time, a majority of 61 lawmakers could vote to ask the president to name a new premier.
another scenario would see the country return, yet again, to the polls.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
negombo, sri lanka: criminal investigators in sri lanka began questioning the crew of a burning cargo ship on monday (may 31), as the singapore-registered carrier burned for a 12th straight day in one of the island's worst-ever marine ecological disasters.
afire broke out aboard the mv x-press pearl, which was carrying 25 tonnes of nitric acid and a huge amount of plastic raw materials, as it was about to enter colombo harbour on may 20. intense flames, still burning at the rear of the 186m vessel, have destroyed much of the cargo, some of which has fallen into the indian ocean.
tonnes of microplastic granules from the ship and its nearly 1,500 containers have inundated sri lanka's famed beaches, forcing a fishing ban and sparking fears of ecological devastation.
marine environment protection authority (mepa) chief dharshani lahandapura said they were still assessing the ecological damage, but believed it was the "worst ever in my lifetime".
the police chief has ordered the criminal investigation department to investigate the fire as well as the huge environmental damage caused, an official said.
"the 25-member crew have completed their quarantine and we are able to question them today," a police spokesman said.
detectives interviewed the vessel's skipper and chief engineer both russian and its chief officer, an indian, at a hotel where they have been quarantined.
"we have questioned three members of the crew so far and the investigations are ongoing," a police spokesman added.
"select seafarers have today been helping local police with their enquiries into the fire and are cooperating with investigators," the vessel's operators, x-press feeders, added in a statement.
"we will respect this process and not publicly discuss operational details until the investigation has been completed.
"mepa said the captain of the vessel had known about a nitric acid leak on may 11, long before the vessel entered sri lankan waters.
authorities are moving to sue the owners of the vessel and its crew and claim damages from insurers.
the fire has been under control since sunday, officials said, adding, however, that the vessel continued to smoke on monday and that high monsoon winds were fanning flames at the back of the ship.
they said it was still too hot for them to attempt boarding the stricken ship.
international salvage firm smit is leading efforts to douse the flames and is being assisted by sri lanka's navy and the indian coast guard.
the three-month-old ship was heading to colombo from gujarat, india.
it had previously visited qatar and dubai and was due to go to malaysia and singapore after calling at colombo.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
top executives of financial firms in hong kong will be granted exemptions from quarantine in the city, according to the local regulator, giving the sector a first-mover advantage to reopening.
hong kong authorities launched new rules, effective as of last week, that will enable alliterative traveling options specifically for senior executives in the financial sector with regional or global roles.
«the chief secretary for administration of the hong kong special administrative region government (matthew cheung kin-chung) has designated certain categories of persons in the financial services sector to be exempted from the compulsory quarantine arrangements in hong kong,» according to a circular released last friday night by the securities and futures commission (sfc).
«senior executives of licensed corporations or their overseas affiliates who are fully vaccinated and meet the eligibility criteria may apply for exemption from the compulsory quarantine arrangements when they return or travel to hong kong,» according to a circular released last friday night by the securities and futures commission (sfc).
bubble rulesin addition a senior position at a licensed firm, financial professionals seeking exemption from the otherwise compulsory 21-day quarantine must submit an application with a detailed itinerary for the proposed trip to be electronically approved by the financial services and the treasury bureau (fstb).
the applying senior executive will only be allowed to leave their designated accommodation for approved activities set out in the itinerary alongside other requirements such as coronavirus tests, point-to-point transport, self-isolation and medical surveillance.
exemption limitslicensed financial firms will be provided with four exemptions per month with two for visitors and two for returning executives, according to the circular.
breaching self-isolation requirements from designated accommodation will result in compulsory 21-day quarantine and failure to observe other exemption rules could result in a hk$5,000 ($644) fine and a six months of imprisonment.
the new rules were announced one day after the hong kong-singapore travel bubble was supposed to launch but were suspended for the second time due to an infection spike in the latter city-state.
+ more on this topic+ more on this topic
singapore — ntuc foodfare at 308 anchorvale road is closed from sunday for two weeks and will reopen on 13 june as investigations by the ministry of health (moh) show there is likely ongoing transmission of covid-19 at the coffee shop.
"to break any potential chain of transmission and enable deep cleaning of the premises, ntuc foodfare at 308 anchorvale road has been closed to all members of the public starting from 30 may 2021 and will re-open 14 days later, on 13 june 2021," the moh said on sunday in its daily covid-19 report.
to pre-emptively mitigate any potential risk of wider, undetected community transmission, the authorities will offer free covid-19 testing for members of the public who had visited the coffee shop from 13 may to 30 may.
all visitors to the location over the period are advised to monitor their health closely for 14 days from their date of visit.
they are encouraged to visit a regional screening centre or "swab and send home" public health preparedness clinic for a free covid-19 testing.
moh also confirmed a 95-year-old singaporean died on sunday from covid-19 infection – the 33rd such fatality in singapore.
on sunday, moh reported 25 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,028. there are 19 cases of locally transmitted infection, of which 13 are linked to past cases.
stay in the know on-the-go: join yahoo singapore's telegram channel at http://t.
me/yahoosingaporerelated stories:singaporean woman, 95, dies of covid-19 infection, linked to airport clustersingapore detects 19 local covid-19 infections, 6 imported casespm lee to speak on singapore's covid-19 plans at 4pm on mondaysri lanka launched a criminal probe on sunday into a massive container ship fire that has swamped the island nation's coast with plastic pollution in an unprecedented marine disaster.
tonnes of microplastic granules have inundated the south asian country's famed beaches, forcing a fishing ban and prompting fears of ecological damage.
the ministry of health (moh) on sunday (30 may) confirmed the detection of 25 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,028. smart,5%!$1,600,!british prime minister boris johnson married his fiancee carrie symonds in a "secret ceremony" on saturday, uk media reports said.
whilst the typical homeownership journey for most singaporeans is 'upgrading' from an hdb flat to a private property (e. g.   homeowners who need more space for their growing families might move from their smaller condo to a larger hdb flat.
on the other hand, an older couple may also choose to move into a smaller hdb flat once their children have moved out.
a 51-year-old woman recovering from a brain tumour died after consuming traditional chinese medicine (tcm) which likely caused her acute liver failure, the state coroner found.
n1   09:00-13:00   91 | n2    10:00-14:00  716the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
singapore residents will soon be able to purchase "do-it-yourself" covid-19 tests over the counter at pharmacies, said prime minister lee hsien loong on monday (31 may).
from tuesday (1 june), 400,000 students from schools and ihls can register for the covid-19 vaccine.
《!》ut,!israeli and egyptian officials held talks in both countries sunday aimed at bolstering the cairo-brokered ceasefire that ended the latest deadly flare-up of violence between the jewish state and gaza's hamas rulers.
he risked everything to give his baby girl a second chance at life this article, cannabis can mean death in malaysia.
for one dad, it also meant life for his daughter.
, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
gavin macleod, a veteran supporting actor best known for his role as an ever-smiling cruise ship captain on the 1970s-80s sitcom "the love boat," died saturday at the age of 90.
$6,600「」,$100「」to enhance singapore's overall vaccine coverage and offer more flexibility, the government will allow private healthcare providers here to import and administer alternative covid-19 vaccines via special access routes (sars).
hdb resale flats are a great alternative for those who can't wait years for a bto.
compare hdb resale flat prices and trends in this comprehensive guide to resale flats in singapore.
israeli opposition leader yair lapid on monday said many obstacles remain before a diverse coalition can be built to oust veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu but voiced hope it will achieve the "greater goal".
spinningfields,,, 65-6,,!polish police said monday they were investigating a fake bomb threat that forced a ryanair passenger plane travelling from dublin to krakow to make an emergency landing in berlin.
prime minister lee hsien loong appeared in court via video conferencing on monday (31 may) in a defamation suit against a writer from the online citizen, rubaashini who was absent from the hearing.
brazil's president jair bolsonaro promised the yanomami indigenous people in remarks released sunday that there will be no mining on their land unless they want it.
here is what whole mouth dental implants should cost you in your arearesidents of a small french town laid cards and flowers saturday at the spot where a "very kind" and "gentle" policewoman was seriously wounded in a knife attack the day before, the latest in a spate of attacks on officers.
two people were killed and at least 20 wounded early sunday when three shooters fired indiscriminately into a crowd outside a concert in the miami area, police said, the latest shooting in a year that has seen a surge in both gun sales and gun violence.
hong kong police have arrested an elderly democracy activist as she made a solo demonstration over china's deadly tiananmen crackdown in a vivid illustration of the zero protest tolerance now wielded by authorities in the financial hub.
kuala lumpur: american tyre manufacturer goodyear tire & rubber company is facing accusations of unpaid wages, unlawful overtime and threats to foreign workers at its malaysian factory, according to court documents and complaints filed by workers.
in interviews with reuters, six current and former foreign workers, and officials with malaysia's labour department, say that goodyear made wrongful salary deductions, required excessive hours and denied workers full access to their passports.
the department confirmed that it had fined goodyear in 2020 for overworking and underpaying foreign employees.
one former worker said that the company illegally kept his passport, showing reuters an acknowledgement letter he signed in january 2020 upon getting it back eight years after he started working at goodyear.
the allegations initially surfaced when 185 foreign workers filed three complaints against goodyear malaysia in the country's industrial court, two in 2019 and one in 2020, over non-compliance with a collective labour agreement.
the workers alleged that the company was not giving them shift allowances, annual bonuses and pay increases even though these benefits were available to the local staff, who are represented by a labour union.
the court ruled in favour of the foreign workers in two of the cases last year, saying that they were entitled to the same rights as malaysian employees, according to copies of the judgement published on the court's website.
goodyear was ordered to pay back wages and comply with the collective agreement, according to the judgement and the workers' lawyer.
about 150 worker payslips, which the lawyer said were submitted to the court as evidence of unpaid wages and reviewed by reuters, showed some migrants working as many as 229 hours a month in overtime, exceeding the malaysian limit of 104 hours.
the foreign workers are claiming about rm5 million (us$1.
21 million) in unpaid wages, said their lawyer, chandra segaran rajandran.
the workers are from nepal, myanmar and india.
"they are put in a situation where they are being denied their full rights as what is provided for (by law)," he said, adding that it amounted to "discrimination".
goodyear, one of the world's largest tyre makers, has challenged both verdicts at the high court.
the appeal decision is expected on jul 26. the verdict for the third case, over the same issues, is due in the coming weeks.
goodyear declined to comment on any of the allegations, citing the court process.
according to the court ruling last year, goodyear malaysia argued that foreign workers are not entitled to the benefits of the collective agreement because they are not union members.
according to the ruling, a union representative testified that foreign workers are eligible to join and are entitled to the benefits in the collective agreement even if they are not members.
the court agreed that the foreign workers' job scope entitled them to those benefits.
goodyear told reuters that it has strong policies and practices relating to and protecting human rights.
"we take seriously any allegations of improper behaviour relating to our associates, operations and supply chain," a representative said in an email.
the union the national union of employees in companies manufacturing rubber products did not respond to reuters' requests for comment on the workers' complaints.
goodyear's malaysia operation is jointly owned by the country's largest fund manager, permodalan nasional berhad, which directed queries to goodyear.
fines and violationsworkers said that they faced intimidation from goodyear after they filed the lawsuits.
goodyear declined to comment.
"the company had different rules for different sets of workers," said sharan kumar rai, who filed one of the lawsuits and worked at goodyear in malaysia from 2012 until last year.
the foreign workers filed the first two lawsuits in july 2019.  soon afterwards, goodyear asked some to sign letters, without their lawyer's knowledge, that they would withdraw from the legal action, according to their lawyer, police complaints filed in october 2019 and a copy of the letter seen by reuters.
reporting a complaint to police does not always result in criminal charges but can trigger an investigation.
industrial court chairman anna ng fui choo said in her ruling that the letter "was an act of unfair labour practice".
malaysia's labour department told reuters that it had investigated and charged goodyear in 2020 over nine violations of labour laws, unrelated to the lawsuits, regarding excessive hours and wrongful salary deductions.
it fined goodyear rm41,500 (us$10,050), it said.
malaysia has in recent years faced accusations from its own ministry of human resources and authorities in the united states of labour abuse at its factories, which rely on millions of migrant workers to manufacture everything from palm oil to medical gloves and iphone components.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
kuala lumpur: the malaysian government said on sunday (may 30) that all malls will have to be shut, while 17 essential service sectors will be allowed to operate during the impending two-week "total lockdown".
these sectors include healthcare, telecommunications and media, food and beverage, utilities as well as banking.
the government will also allow companies under 12 manufacturing sectors to continue operating, such as food and drink manufacturing, medical devices, textiles for producing personal protection equipment as well as oil and gas.
they will need to operate at 60 per cent capacity.
in a press conference, senior minister ismail sabri yaakob said: "we hope the manufacturing sector will follow the government's orders, because we have given the condition that only 60 per cent could work.
""but i've read social media posts and found employers who forced their employees to exceed the 60 per cent capacity," he added.
mr ismail sabri said that employees could report such breaches to the human resource ministry and the police.
shopping malls will need to close, except supermarkets and premises dealing in food and beverage and basic necessities, the minister added.
only two people from each household would be allowed to go out to buy essentials or for medical services, with movement limited to a 10km radius.
a statement by the ministry of international trade and industry also said: "the manufacturing and manufacturing related services sectors that are allowed to operate is to ensure minimal disruption to the supply chain of critical parts, components and finished products.
""this is essential to support the continued operations of critical infrastructures and front-liners such as security, healthcare systems, information and communications and as well as ensure adequate supply of basic necessities for the rakyat (people).
"the sunday announcement came after the prime minister's office announced on friday that malaysia would beundergoing a "total lockdown" from jun 1 to jun 14. malaysia's covid-19 numbers have continued to surge, witha record 9,020 new casesand 98 deaths on saturday.
on sunday, there were6,999 new cases.
there are now more than 560,000 cases nationwide.
putrajaya has assured people that there would be sufficient food stocks to last throughout phase 1 of the total lockdown.
however, there have been reports of lines of people flocking to buy necessities and goods in anticipation of tuesday.
during the same press conference on sunday, health ministry director-general noor hisham abdullah warned that a daily increase of 1,000 to 2,000 new cases was not impossible, and that the high number of deaths, such as 98 fatalities recorded on saturday, might continue and even rise.
"the health ministry has warned that a situation might arise where doctors might have to make the difficult choice, to give priority for intensive-care unit (icu) beds to patients with higher recovery potential, than those with poor prognosis.
"​​​​​​​​​​​​​​dr noor hisham outlined five actions that the health ministry would take during the two-week lockdown, including allowing breathing space for healthcare personnel and hospitals to reassess their equipment and speeding up the vaccination process.
healthcare personnel would also do targeted screenings in the field using the rapid test kit-antigen (rtk-ag) detection method for covid-19, he said.
more vaccination centres planned, private clinics to administer jabsearlier on sunday, minister for science, technology and innovation khairy jamaluddin said in a press conference that more vaccination centres will be opened in the coming month to speed up the vaccination process.
the first among these will be five mega vaccination centres around the klang valley.
"three will be in selangor and two will be set up in kuala lumpur," he said, adding that the set up would begin on jun 7. mr khairy, who is also the coordinating minister for the covid-19 immunisation taskforce said 1,000 private general practitioner (gp) clinics will be joining the national covid-19 immunisation program by jun 30. he added that 500 of these clinics will begin administering vaccines starting jun 15.
"i estimate that gps and private hospital vaccination centres can contribute and administer 40,000 doses in a day, and 400,000 doses (in total) by jun 30" he said, adding that this would be subject to the supply of the vaccines.
explaining that there were currently 2,500 gp clinics registered under the immunisation program, mr khairy said the government will be paying the private practices to administer the vaccines.
besides that mr khairy also shared that malaysia will officially start rolling out drive-through vaccinations for the public after a successful pilot project in a university in kota baru, kelantan .
"we did it in universiti sains malaysia in kubang kerian and it was successful.
we will now allow other states to start this for the public too," said the minister.
prior to the total lockdown, the government had begun tightening restrictions under a nationwide movement control order, dubbed "mco 3.
0" which started on may 12 and will last until jun 7. among the restrictions under mco 3.
0include 80 per cent of public sector employees needing to work from home, and 40 per cent for the private sector.
businesses can only operate from 8am until 8pm daily.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore:a covid-19 grant to help workers and self-employed peoplewho are experiencing income loss through thephase 2 (heightened alert)period will open for application on thursday (jun 3).
eligible individuals placed on involuntary no-pay leave for at least a month between may 16 and jun 30 may receive a one-off payout of up to s$700, while those who experience significant income loss of at least 50 per cent may receive up to s$500.
the ministry of social and family development (msf) on monday released details on the eligibility criteria for applicants and the application process for the covid-19 recovery grant temporary.
msf said the grant is a "temporary scheme to facilitate quicker assistance to those whose incomes have fallen significantly and suddenly as a result of this round of closures and tighter restrictions".
this complements the existingcovid-19 recovery grant, which supports individuals who have involuntarily lost their jobs, placed on involuntary no-pay leave or face significant income loss for at least three consecutive months due to the covid-19 pandemic, added the ministry.
here's what you need to know about the covid-19 recovery grant temporary.
who is it for?singaporeans or permanent residents aged 21 and above can apply for the grant.
applicants must live in a property with annual value of not more than s$21,000 and not own more than one property.
prior to the income loss or involuntary no-pay leave, their household income must not exceed s$7,800, or s$2,600 per capita.
employees should have worked for at least a total of six months between january 2019 and december 2020. self-employed people can apply if their net trade income is reduced by at least 50 per cent for at least a month between may 16 and jun 30 compared to their average monthly net trade income in 2019 or 2020. individuals who involuntarily lost their jobs should instead apply for the covid-19 recovery grant, which provides three months of financial support.
can those on other support schemes apply?msf said the covid-19 recovery grant temporary is "meant for those who are not receiving support in june 2021".
as such, individuals cannot receive both the covid-19 recovery grant and the temporary grant concurrently, "so there is no duplication of support", said the ministry.
likewise, those who are getting help from other covid-19 support schemes like the covid-19 driver relief fund are not eligible.
applicants are also not eligible if they are receiving assistance from comcare, sgunited or the seafarers relief package.
full-time national servicemen are not eligible.
those who have previously received the covid-19 recovery grant can apply for the temporary grant if they are not receiving support in june 2021. individuals can receive up to two tranches of support from the covid-19 recovery grant and one tranche from the temporary grant.
how to apply?theonline application portalwill open from 9am on jun 3 to 11.
59pm on jul 2. applicants should prepare the following supporting documents:- documents on bank account details for the disbursement of funds- for employees: relevant documents indicating placement on involuntary no-pay leave or salary loss of at least 50 per cent for at least a month- for self-employed people: relevant documents indicating that you are currently self-employedno proof of job search or training will be required for applicants.
this is because the intent of the temporary grant is "to provide one-off financial support to affected individuals during a period of tightened restrictions, where it may be challenging for applicants to find a job or seek out training opportunities", said msf.
those who need help completing the online application form can ring the comcare call hotline or email msf's social service office.
alternatively, they can visit their nearest social service office.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
'super blood moon' glows across globe trapped at border israel-palestine conflict escalates india's covid-19 surge is worsening 'super pink moon' shines across the world
christchurch: growing friction with china and how to reopen borders after the pandemic will likely be among the topics discussed by the leaders of australia and new zealand in their first face-to-face meeting since the covid-19 outbreak prompted both countries to close their borders.
australian prime minister scott morrison arrived in the tourist resort of queenstown for an overnight visit on sunday (may 30).
he greeted his new zealand counterpart jacinda ardern with a traditional maori hongi, in which the pair pressed noses together.
morrison is the first major world leader to visit new zealand since both countries shut their borders last year to contain the virus.
the neighbours opened a quarantine-free travel bubble last month, although a recent outbreak of the virus in melbourne has prompted new zealand tosuspend the arrangement with victoria state.
morrison's visit came as new zealand was dealing with extensive flooding in the canterbury region following heavy rains.
video footage showed one farmer being rescued by helicopter from a raging river, while other swelling rivers threatened to flood thousands of homes.
the choice of queenstown for the meeting was deliberate as new zealand tries to revive its battered tourism industry.
queenstown has been particularly hard-hit by the pandemic, although tourism operators say they expect a boost from australian tourists during the upcoming ski season now the travel bubble has begun.
the changing dynamics with china have been a big topic in both countries.
australia's relationship with china has deteriorated significantly.
china has blocked some australian exports after australia excluded china-based telecommunications company huawei from its 5g phone network and called for an independent investigation into the origins of the coronavirus.
new zealand has also been more outspoken against china on some issues in recent months, although has so far maintained better relations with the superpower than australia.
ardern said she would talk with morrison about the pandemic recovery as well as key regional challenges and security issues.
"our relationship with australia is our closest and most important and this has never been more evident than in these trying times for the world," ardern told reporters.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore has "ample supply of food and essential items" but people should buy only what they need, said minister for trade and industry gan kim yong on monday (may 31), on the back of supply concerns arising from malaysia's two-week lockdown.
singapore:  singapore has "ample supply of food and essential items" but people should buy only what they need, said minister for trade and industry gan kim yong on monday (may 31).
mr gan's comments came on the back of supply concerns arising frommalaysia's two-week lockdownfrom jun 1 to jun 14.  singapore imports several products from malaysia, including chicken, fish and vegetables.
"we are working with malaysia to ensure the continued flow of essential supplies between our two countries," said mr gan, speaking at a covid-19 multi-ministry task force.
the government has been working closely with relevant agencies and companies to build up existing stock, further diversify its sources of food and essential items while also increasing local production, he said.
"i want to assure everyone that we have ample supply of food and essential items.
but please remember to only buy what you need," said mr gan, who is also co-chair of the task force.
economic agencies in singapore are working with companies, especially those dealing with essential goods and services, to minimise disruptions to their supply lines, he added.
mr gan visited supermarket chain fairprice and home-grown supply chain solutions company ych over the weekend to better understand the measures that have been put in place to ensure that there is sufficient food and essential items for all, he said.
describing the covid-19 situation as "extremely fluid", mr gan said that as the pandemic continues to evolve globally, singapore must remain prepared and vigilant as a nation while staying flexible and adaptable.
speaking after prime minister lee hsien loong's address on singapore's strategy against covid-19, mr gan said that the next few months are "critical".
"we are in a race with the virus.
the virus will attempt to spread wider and faster, and therefore we need to do more and do faster too, in vaccination, testing and contact tracing," he said.
impact expected to be "modest"touching on the potential impact of the tighter covid-19 restrictions during phase 2 (heightened alert) on singapore's economy, mr gan said that he expects the overall impact to be modest.
"the impact of the measures will differ across different sectors.
domestic, consumer-oriented sectors, such as food and beverage services, retail, and land transport, will see a greater impact," he added.
"on the other hand, the impact of these measures on outward-oriented sectors of the economy, such as manufacturing and finance and insurance, is likely to be less severe.
"last friday, finance minister lawrence wong announcedmore support measuresfor businesses affected by the tightened measures, extending wage subsidies to more sectors.
"even as we do our best to manage the situation at hand, mti will continue to give businesses, our full support to help them transform and seize new opportunities when they arise," said mr gan.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
taipei: taiwan's parliament approved on monday (may 31) an extra nt$420 billion (us$15.
20 billion) in stimulus spending to help the economy deal with the covid-19 pandemic, as the island curbs business activity to counter a spike in domestic infections.
early and effective prevention steps, including largely closing its borders, had succeeded in shielding taiwan from the worst of the pandemic.
but cases have surged in recent weeks, prompting the government to limit personal gatherings and shut entertainment venues while it tries to speed up its vaccination programme.
the new money is in addition to previously announced stimulus spending worth nt$420 billion, and the funding will run until jun 30 of next year.
the central bank is also running a separate nt$400 billion scheme to provide preferential loans to small and medium-sized business.
taiwan's government has repeatedly sought to allay fears that the current outbreak of domestic infections will affect the export-dependent economy, a major global supplier of semiconductors.
taiwan's central bank said on monday it was paying close attention to how the spread of the virus could affect economic growth and that it will act if needed to ensure financial stability.
however, taiwan's stock market has largely shaken off concerns about the coronavirus impact, with the benchmark index closing up 1.
2 per cent on monday.
infections have been heavily concentrated in taipei and its nearby cities, and the numbers are beginning to fall.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore the b1617 covid-19 variant has infiltrated over 50 countries, outcompeted other strains and continues to infect.
it will also not be the last time the virus will mutate, experts cautioned.
but what makes this strain, first discovered in india, so good at spreading?dr sebastian maurer-stroh, virus expert and executive director of the bioinformatics institute at the agency for science, technology and research, points out four features that the b1617 strain has in common with successful virus strains.
he uses one of the three versions of the b1617 strain- the second b16172 version to show what makes this virus different.
b16172 has appeared to overtake b16171 in local cases as well as those reported globally.
the third version, b16173, is rare.
first, a little primer on coronavirus biology.
what you see in the diagram below is the spike protein of a coronavirus the little spikes that give the virus its distinctive shape.
the spike protein is a trimer three subunits joined together.
it is the complex shown in grey.
the green and yellow complexes are two different antibodies that bind to the spike protein.
the coloured circles represent the different mutations in b16172.
characteristic 1: the virus' mutations help it to bind more easily with the ace2 receptor.
ace2 is short for angiotensin converting enzyme 2, which is a receptor protein in the host cell.
ace2 receptors are found in various parts of the body, including respiratory airways, and are used as entry points by the sars-cov-2 virus.
the sars-cov-2 virus gets inside a host cell through its surface spike protein.
the spike protein and the receptors have a specific 3d configuration that enables them to bind to each other.
the virus attaches only to cells that have these receptors.
the spike protein attaches to an ace2 receptor in the host cell before being activated by another enzyme.
now, let's take a closer look at one of the subunits on the spike protein to see how its mutations have helped.
scientists think the l452r mutation and to a lesser extent the t478k mutation makes it easier for the virus to attach itself to the receptor and thus get inside the cell.
if binding to the receptor is easier, the virus can get inside the host cell more easily and infect more cells.
but being more infectious does not mean it can make people more ill. a more transmissible strain most often does not have more symptoms or lead to a more severe form of the disease.
characteristic 2: decreasing binding to antibodiest478k and certain other mutations which are circled near the yellow antibody probably make the virus less likely to stick to antibodies.
in a full immune response, many types of antibodies work together.
though a decrease in antibody binding has yet to be proven for t478k, correlation was drawn based on existing data.
the e484k mutation found in the b1351 and p1 variants is located in the same region as t478k hence it is likely that there will be a similar effect.
even though one mutation could slightly reduce the protection derived from vaccines and prior infections, it is insufficient to remove their utility.
vaccination and natural immunity from prior infections are still very effective in reducing the chance of getting infected and spreading the disease, as well as protection against a severe form of the disease even in the case of variants.
characteristic 3: a more stable spike protein  the d614g mutation has been very successful in improving spike protein stability and is found in practically all strains of the virus.
d614g results in the spike protein adopting a more open conformation, which gives it more surface area to interact with the ace2 receptor, hence increasing its infectivity.
a more stable spike protein can also mean more spike protein expressed on the virus surface, increasing its chances of infecting host cells.
d614g has been linked to increased transmissibility and a higher viral load but not increased severity.
characteristic 4: improving cleavage ratesthe spike protein needs to be cleaved into two units (called s1 and s2 units) to allow structural changes needed to enter into cells.
the diagram shows the spike protein on the sars-cov-2 virus before cleavage and the right shows what it looks like after the s1 unit has dissociated.
mutations like p681r could potentially improve cleavage rates and hence increase infectivity.
this has yet to be confirmed experimentally.
this article was first published in the straits times.
permission required for reproduction.
by lidia kelly(reuters) australia's prime minister scott morrison arrived in new zealand on sunday for high-level talks hours after the country's government chose to support canberra in its dispute with china on barley tariffs, signalling good will to work on differences in how to approach beijing.
quarantine-free travel between australia and new zealand began last month after both nations controlled the spread of covid-19, allowing morrison and prime minister jacinda ardern to meet face to face for the first time in 15 months.
the talks were likely to be challenged by differences over china, the biggest trading partner of both countries, with australia at loggerheads with beijing and new zealand taking a more accommodating approach.
china has in recent months moved to restrict imports of australian products such as barley, wine and beef, with the world trade organisation saying on friday it would establish a dispute settlement panel to resolve the barley row.
ahead of morrison's visit, new zealand trade minister damien o'connor said his government was backing canberra in the spat.
"new zealand is participating in this dispute as a third party because it raises systemic issues of importance to the effective functioning of the multilateral rules-based trading system," local media cited o'connor as saying.
"new zealand was not asked to join as a third party, however we have been a third party in over 60 wto cases since 1995 and it's not unusual for us to join actions disputes when we see challenges to international trade rules.
"australia's ties with china have sunk to their lowest point in decades in the past 18 months after morrison led calls for a global enquiry into the origins of covid-19 and australia barred chinese tech giant huawei technologies co from its 5g network.
new zealand's economic ties with china have been strengthening, with the two countries this year upgrading their free trade agreement.
new zealand also said last month it was "uncomfortable" with expanding the role of the five eyes, a post-war intelligence grouping that also includes the united states, britain, australia and canada.
this raised speculation that wellington did not back the group's recent criticisms of beijing.
china has accused the five eyes of ganging up on it with statements on hong kong and the treatment of muslim uyghurs in xinjiang.
formal talks between ardern and morrison, expected to be dominated by china and its growing influence in the region, are to take place on monday.
(reporting by lidia kelly in melbourne; editing by william mallard and kim coghill)sri lanka launched a criminal probe on sunday into a massive container ship fire that has swamped the island nation's coast with plastic pollution in an unprecedented marine disaster.
tonnes of microplastic granules have inundated the south asian country's famed beaches, forcing a fishing ban and prompting fears of ecological damage.
the ministry of health (moh) on sunday (30 may) confirmed the detection of 25 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,028.
《!》ut,!british prime minister boris johnson married his fiancee carrie symonds in a "secret ceremony" on saturday, uk media reports said.
whilst the typical homeownership journey for most singaporeans is 'upgrading' from an hdb flat to a private property (e. g.   homeowners who need more space for their growing families might move from their smaller condo to a larger hdb flat.
on the other hand, an older couple may also choose to move into a smaller hdb flat once their children have moved out.
a 51-year-old woman recovering from a brain tumour died after consuming traditional chinese medicine (tcm) which likely caused her acute liver failure, the state coroner found.
join us for a hybrid info session to learn about the weekday mode of the part-time mba.
limited space available, so secure yours today!the remote pacific nation of palau reported its first confirmed coronavirus case monday, but authorities said it was historical and posed no transmission risk.
singapore residents will soon be able to purchase "do-it-yourself" covid-19 tests over the counter at pharmacies, said prime minister lee hsien loong on monday (31 may).
from tuesday (1 june), 400,000 students from schools and ihls can register for the covid-19 vaccine.
smart,5%!$1,600,!israeli and egyptian officials held talks in both countries sunday aimed at bolstering the cairo-brokered ceasefire that ended the latest deadly flare-up of violence between the jewish state and gaza's hamas rulers.
he risked everything to give his baby girl a second chance at life this article, cannabis can mean death in malaysia.
for one dad, it also meant life for his daughter.
, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
gavin macleod, a veteran supporting actor best known for his role as an ever-smiling cruise ship captain on the 1970s-80s sitcom "the love boat," died saturday at the age of 90.
???,.
,,,.
to enhance singapore's overall vaccine coverage and offer more flexibility, the government will allow private healthcare providers here to import and administer alternative covid-19 vaccines via special access routes (sars).
hdb resale flats are a great alternative for those who can't wait years for a bto.
compare hdb resale flat prices and trends in this comprehensive guide to resale flats in singapore.
israeli opposition leader yair lapid on monday said many obstacles remain before a diverse coalition can be built to oust veteran prime minister benjamin netanyahu but voiced hope it will achieve the "greater goal".
$6,600「」,$100「」polish police said monday they were investigating a fake bomb threat that forced a ryanair passenger plane travelling from dublin to krakow to make an emergency landing in berlin.
prime minister lee hsien loong appeared in court via video conferencing on monday (31 may) in a defamation suit against a writer from the online citizen, rubaashini who was absent from the hearing.
brazil's president jair bolsonaro promised the yanomami indigenous people in remarks released sunday that there will be no mining on their land unless they want it.
yahoo,,,『,』,!residents of a small french town laid cards and flowers saturday at the spot where a "very kind" and "gentle" policewoman was seriously wounded in a knife attack the day before, the latest in a spate of attacks on officers.
two people were killed and at least 20 wounded early sunday when three shooters fired indiscriminately into a crowd outside a concert in the miami area, police said, the latest shooting in a year that has seen a surge in both gun sales and gun violence.
hong kong police have arrested an elderly democracy activist as she made a solo demonstration over china's deadly tiananmen crackdown in a vivid illustration of the zero protest tolerance now wielded by authorities in the financial hub.
submitted by stomper simonthis story was submitted via stomp app contribution.
this story was submitted via stomp app contribution.
a 63-year-old motorcyclist died from his injuries after an accident with a trailer at the junction of penjuru road and penjuru lane on friday (may 28).
in response to a stomp query, the police said they were alerted to a fatal accident involving a motorcycle and a trailer at 11.
57am.
they added: "the 63-year-old male motorcyclist was unconscious when conveyed to the hospital, where he later died from his injuries.
"stomper simon shared a video taken at the scene, showing paramedics trying to resuscitate the motorcyclist.
the victim's bike can be seen lying on the road.
police investigations are ongoing.
get more of stomp's latest updates by following us on facebook, whatsapp, twitter, instagram and youtube.
view the discussion thread.
view the discussion thread.
download the new stomp app today.
sph digital news | the straits timesall rights reserved | terms & conditions | data protection policy | advertise with ussph digital news / stomp / copyright (c) 2019 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
loading.
.
.
monday, 31 may 2021 02:57 pm mytby tan mei zi

the cafe admitted that better words could have been used to describe the indonesian dish.
— pictures via instagram/theritual.
sg and the ritual website

follow us on instagram and subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on news you need to know.
petaling jaya, may 31 — a singapore cafe has apologised for claiming to serve nasi padang "without the nasties" in a now-deleted instagram post.
the ritual, located on bukit timah road, posted a statement on their instagram over the weekend admitting that the choice of words they used to refer to a "locally-inspired" dish was "inappropriate" and "insensitive.
""it failed to articulate our original intentions and our respect for the culture and heritage of nasi padang as a dish.
"it did not align with our team's values and we made the decision to remove it early this morning.
"we are extremely sorry for causing any hurt, anger, or offence," read the statement.
a post shared by ∞ theritual ∞ (@theritual.
sg) the ritual previously made an instagram post inviting customers to enjoy its nasi padang "without the nasties" and indulge in a "guilt-free" treat.
the caption went on to explain that the dish is made without monosodium glutamate (msg) and additives, and that diners could taste "indonesian flavours bursting forth minus the guilt.
"indonesians then converged on the cafe's social media to call it out for presenting one of the nation's most iconic foods in a negative light.
the ritual's apology has not gone down well either and many have continued to criticise the cafe for its handling of the situation.
"yeah, the nasties being msg, colouring, etc.
.
.
real nasi padang doesn't have any of those, so which nasi padang have you been eating that contains such things?
"i hope you understand why this really was an issue, it's the implication (more) than anything else," instagram user @jhotan_ commented.
another user also slammed the cafe for failing to do proper research on the culture and cuisine it was lifting its recipes from.
"you can stop adopting any other culture you're unsure of and the first step is to take the nasi padang off your menu, 'cause you don't deserve to serve that in your restaurant," said @pandazhar.
the nasi padang dish is still available on the ritual's e-menu for sgd21 (rm65) at the time of writing.
the cafe initially responded to the backlash on their instagram stories and said that there was no intention to put anyone's culture down with the post.
the management also claimed that they simply wanted to create a "healthier" version of nasi padang so people with dietary restrictions could savour it as well.
nasi padang is one of the best-known dishes of minangkabau cuisine and hails from the west sumatra province of indonesia.
it consists of rice with a variety of side dishes which are typically put on display in restaurant windows in towering arrangements of stacked up plates and bowls.
loading.
.
.
© 2021, malay mail, all rights reserved.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
petaling jaya (reuters, the star/asia news network) malaysia reported 6,999 new coronavirus cases on sunday (may 30), bringing the total infections in the country to 565,533. the daily figure was down from saturday's 9,020. health director-general, tan sri dr noor hisham abdullah, said selangor topped the list of states with the most number of infections at 2,477 cases, reported the star.
this was followed by kuala lumpur (616) and kelantan (612).
perlis, the smallest state in malaysia, recorded the lowest number of infections at seven cases, followed by the federal territories of putrajaya and labuan at 13 and 133 cases, respectively.
this brings the total infections in the country to 565,533 cases.
meanwhile, the nation is planning to set up more mega vaccination centres and get private doctors to join immunisation efforts, after five consecutive days of record daily coronavirus infections.
science minister khairy jamaluddin told a virtual news briefing on sunday that the government will set up another five mega vaccination centres around the capital, kuala lumpur, and are considering two in the northern state of penang and in the southern state of johor.
the government will also train general practitioners (gps) to administer covid-19 vaccines, he said, noting that some vaccines need to be handled and stored differently from usual vaccines.
"before this, there was no need (to involve the private healthcare sector) because the vaccine supply was not a lot.
as the supply increases, we want to facilitate private clinics, (gp) clinics, private hospitals to roll out the vaccines via our programme, for free," he said.
the private vaccination centres could administer a total of 40,000 doses a day, he said, adding that the government aims to raise daily vaccinations to 150,000 doses.
it has reached 107,000 doses a day this week.
mr khairy said the government aims to have 500 gp clinics administering vaccines by june 15. by the end of june, a total of 1,000 clinics will be designated as vaccination centres, the star reported mr khairy as saying.
mr khairy said there are currently 2,500 gp clinics that have registered to aid the national immunisation programme.
nearly 6 per cent of the country's 32 million people have been vaccinated, according to the website of the governmental special committee for ensuring access to covid-19 vaccine supply.
mr khairy said the government is also looking to allow drive-through vaccination centres in the country, after guidelines are firmed up.
prime minister muhyiddin yassin on friday announced a nationwide total lockdown from june 1 to 14 in an effort to curb the spread of the virus.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
a local cafe wanted to cater to customers with dietary restrictions, but found themselves in the soup when they marketed their version of a beloved indonesian dish as "without the nasties".
the ritual, a cafe which offers fresh bread, acai bowls, and other health food, was called out for its inappropriate messaging and cultural insensitivity after implying that nasi padang was something to feel guilty about.
"we are extremely sorry for causing any hurt, anger or offence," the cafe wrote in an instagram post on saturday (may 29).
"the choice of words was inappropriate and insensitive.
"[embed]https://www.
instagram.
com/p/cpdbfcmniai/[/embed]while they explained their intention was to create a "healthier" version of the dish using different ingredients, they acknowledged in an instagram story that their marketing copy "[gave] room for misunderstanding and created tension" and that they would be more mindful of how they communicate.
despite their apology, netizens were still upset and demanded the cafe removed the dish from their menu, saying they "don't deserve to serve that in [their] restaurant.
"to further show their disdain towards the cafe, several netizens uploaded photos of their own versions of nasi padang with all the "nasties".
other netizens, however, pointed out the phrase "nasi padang without the nasties" appeared to be "a case of thoughtless copywriting, rather than an attack on a culture".
they believed the cafe had made an honest mistake but also suggested they could do better by conducting more extensive research to spin a more appropriate narrative in the future.
rainercheung@asiaone.
com

                    monday, 31 may 2021
                petaling jaya: measures will be taken to ensure that the food supply chain will not be disrupted during the 14-day total lockdown, says the agriculture and food industries ministry.
minister datuk seri dr ronald kiandee (pic), in a statement monday (may 31), gave an assurance that follow-up measures and arrangements will be implemented to ensure that all networks and chains in the agriculture and food industry sector, including its ecosystem, will not be affected during the implementation of phase one of the total lockdown.
industry players and entrepreneurs involved in the agriculture, fisheries, livestock and plantation sectors have also been advised to contact the nearest department or agency under the ministry to obtain a letter of confirmation, besides having to comply with all standard operating procedures (sops) outlined by the government to curb the spread of covid-19.
"the ministry is committed to ensuring that the food supply chain in malaysia remains at a stable, adequate and controlled level as well as ensuring access is always available to the public," the statement read.
kiandee also said the ministry estimated that a total of 100,000 to 150,000 metric tonnes of rice will be needed throughout the 14 days of the lockdown, which includes assumptions in the event of panic buying.
"this supply can be met based on the current stock of 764,000 metric tons available at manufacturers, wholesalers and retailers," he said.
to ensure continuous supply and uninterrupted production of rice, kiandee said the ministry will ensure that the process of cultivation and mill operations will be able to operate at the permitted rate in accordance with sops set by the national security council (nsc).
"this includes permission for the distribution of agricultural input such as fertilisers, rice seeds and the use of 'jentuai' (harvesting machines) during the period," he said.
kiandee noted that padi cultivation and harvesting are currently under way in several states such as penang, perak, pahang, kelantan and terengganu.
the distribution of rice by wholesalers and retailers is also allowed in accordance with sops set by the nsc to ensure that supplies are not affected.
kiandee also revealed that the current stock of the country's fish supply is at 185,000 metric tonnes per month compared to the current requirement of 155,000 metric tonnes per month.
"a total of 89 fish markets and 33 fish collection and distribution centres will still operate nationwide during phase one of the lockdown.
"based on data on the supply of livestock commodities, it is expected that the supply of meat, poultry, eggs and milk will also be sufficient," he said.
to ensure the public's access to food supply needs, kiandee said the ministry, through the federal agriculture marketing authority (fama), has opened 43 controlled fresh market locations nationwide, consisting of 24 permanent farmers' markets, three myfarm outlets, 14 fama operation centres and two agrobazaars, compared to 63 locations that were opened during mco 1.
0 last year.
"this reduction is due to the implementation of tightened sops by nsc to address the third wave transmission of covid-19," he said.
kiandee called on all agro-food entrepreneurs including farmers, ranchers and fishermen to always abide by the sop and maintain personal health at all times by prioritising the use of face masks, physical distancing and hand hygiene.
"the ministry would like to advise the public not to panic-buy and stockpile food excessively, which can result in situations where there is unequal public access to food supply," he added.
the public can contact the ministry's operations room at 03 88701663/ 1664/ 1491 or email bilikgerakan@mafi.
gov.
my to obtain any information or clarification related to the agriculture sector and food industry.
to obtain information on activities, operations and sop during phase one of the lockdown, the public can visit https://www.
mafi.
gov.
my/  
tags / keywords:
agriculture and food industries ministry
                                                                ,
                                                                                                ronald kiandee
                                                                ,
                                                                                                fama
                                                                ,
                                                                                                food supply
                                                                ,
                                                                                                essentials
                                                                ,
                                                                                                lockdown
                                                                ,
                                                                                                rice
                                                                ,
                                                                                                fish
                                                                ,
                                                                                                markets



report it to us.
thank you for your report!copyright © 1995-
            

 star media group berhad (10894d)best viewed on chrome browsers.
{{item['v1 header']}}
   {{item['v1 body']}}

  {{item['v2 header']}}

are you having urinary troubles?
by taking the survey, it is deemed that you consent to the termswe hope you enjoy this feature!
we have updated our terms and conditions and privacy policy 
click "continue" to accept and continue with et healthworlddear user, et healthworld privacy and cookie policy has been updated to align with the new data regulations in european union.
please review and accept these changes below to continue using the website.
you can see our privacy policy & our cookie policy.
we use cookies to ensure the best experience for you on our website.
if you choose to ignore this message, we'll assume that you are happy to receive all cookies on et healthworld.
jb chemicals launches medicated nicotine lozenges to help quit smoking3 hrs ago87% of last week's deceased were unvaccinated 45-plus5 hrs agorebooting cancer awarenessthe unsung hero in faster holistic recoverydo you think you are up for the challenge?holistic solutions for a healthier india17 julyadopting-dynamic-technologiesthe patient is a man in his 30s who got the shot on april 27 because of his job at a medical facility, korea disease control and prevention agency (kdca) director jeong eun-kyeong told a briefing.
recommended by colombia125000+ industry leaders read it everyday
				how did you hear about us?
print
web
friends

the drug has been launched under the brand name 'ujvira' and has been priced at rs.
32495 for a 100 mg vial.
the common antiparasitic ivermectin is being touted as a miracle cure for covid-19 by doctors and campaigners the world over.
we have various options to advertise with us including events, advertorials, banners, mailers, webinars etc.
please contact us to know more details.
get ethealthworld's top stories every morning in your email inbox.
125000+ industry leaders read it everydayfollow @ethealthworld for the latest news, insider access to events and more.
ms nemelyn agustin, 42, has been working in singapore for 15 years as a domestic helper and usually spends her days off at lucky plaza with friends to eat and shop.
however, with the manpower ministry's latest advisory on may 21 that encouraged domestic workers to stay at home during their rest days, ms agustin has had to change up her routine.
"now, on my days off, i watch korean dramas or video call my family in the philippines.
"as for my friends in singapore, i keep in contact with them through facebook messenger or whatsapp," she said.
she is anxious about the current pandemic situation, but she has not been adversely affected by the tightened measures as she can still keep in contact with friends and family and remit money through online payment services like singtel dash.
ms denise wang, 20, a member of the family who employs ms agustin, said the helper is comfortable staying home on her days off.
"she has worked with us for 15 years.
.
.
we also have another helper with whom she gets along well," she said.
meanwhile, ms agustin's employers have booked an appointment for her to get vaccinated.
other domestic helpers said they understood the rationale behind the tightened measures.
ms maricel sueta serantes, 50, said: "we need to cooperate and fight the virus by staying home.
i am okay as long as i am being compensated.
"she usually has sundays off but told her employers that she preferred to stay at home because of the pandemic.
"i haven't had to make many changes, and i still keep in contact with my friends and family through facebook messenger and whatsapp.
"i also do daily exercises when i take my employers an elderly couple out for a walk," she said.
the centre for domestic employees (cde) has temporarily closed its gathering sites at the amphitheatre @ 20 anderson road, and let's gather @ 99 haig road.
however, the centre has moved its activities such as the upcoming may day domestic employee celebrations on june 13 online to engage and support the migrant domestic workers (mdws) community.
said cde executive director shamsul kamar: "we have shared the tightened measures with mdws and encouraged them to stay home as much as possible.
mdws and employers who need advice can always reach out to cde on our 24-hour helpline (1800-2255-233) or through our social media channels and e-mail.
"he added: "we believe that our mdws understand the need for the tightened measures, and they are cautious of the situation given the recent community cases.
"they are aware of the risks.
.
.
and want to play their part in our nation's fight against the virus.
"get the new paper on your phone with the free tnp app.
download from the apple app store or google play store now
a 68-year-old woman kept police officers at bay for almost two hours after locking herself in her ninth-storey flat at block 45 circuit road on saturday morning.
in response to queries from the new paper, the police said they received a call for assistance at 10.
23am that day.
"as it was assessed that the woman might pose a danger to herself, officers from crisis negotiation unit, special operations command and singapore civil defence force (scdf) responded to the incident," added the police spokesman.
a resident who lives three doors away and wanted to be known only as mrs rose, 52, said: "i was woken up by some commotion outside.
i looked out of the window and saw scdf officers rushing along the corridor.
"she added that the woman lives alone and often keeps to herself.
"i am concerned about how her sister is coping with all this.
her sister visits her regularly and told me she is always worried that there is no food in the house," said mrs rose, who runs an online business.
it is understood that the sister called the police when she went to visit and found the woman had locked herself in.
mr wang zhen ming, 60, who lives in the unit directly above the woman's, said he knew something was wrong only when scdf officers knocked on his door.
"they asked if they could hang something from my kitchen window as it would help in rescuing a woman. "
i can't believe i was in my living room the entire time and didn't hear any noise from downstairs," the warehouse clerk added.
scdf said it deployed a safety life air pack, and rescuers from the disaster assistance and rescue team were on standby as a precautionary measure.
a hawker, 58, who wanted to be known only as ms wong, was on her way to work when she saw scdf truck.
"i live a few of blocks away and my first thought was there was a fire.
but some residents told me a woman was sitting on the window ledge.
.
.
then she went back into her flat when the police arrived," she said.
the police said they gained entry to the unit at 12.
30pm.
"the woman was apprehended under the mental health (care and treatment) act.
no injuries were reported," added the police.
get the new paper on your phone with the free tnp app.
download from the apple app store or google play store now
taipei: taiwan has not given up hope of eventually getting covid-19 vaccines from germany's biontech, health minister chen shih-chung said on sunday (may 30), a deal that taipei's government has blamed china for not being able to complete.
after recording just a handful of daily infections for months, taiwan is dealing with relatively large numbers of community transmissions, though infection rates are starting to fall.
it has only vaccinated around 1 per cent of its more than 23 million people but has almost 30 million shots on order, from astrazeneca, moderna and two domestic firms.
the chinese-claimed island has blamed beijing for nixing a deal earlier this year for biontech vaccines, which china denies.
chen told reporters that although talks for that shot had "somewhat hit the rocks", taiwan "has not completely given up hope" of obtaining them.
shanghai fosun pharmaceutical group co has a contract with biontech to sell the vaccines in greater china, including to taiwan, but taiwan's government says it will only deal with germany's biontech directly and does not trust vaccines from china.
outside of greater china, biontech has partnered with pfizer.
chen said that in late january, the covax vaccine-sharing scheme for lower-income countries had told taiwan it could get shots from pfizer, but on may 3 covax informed the government that would not be possible.
taiwan is under its second-highest level of curbs to stop the spread of infections, including limiting personal gatherings and closing entertainment venues.
chen said the task was to ensure those measures were being properly enforced, adding, "at present there are no plans or intentions for a lockdown.
"the government has come under fire from opposition parties for delays in testing and reporting positive cases, but chen said that was now improving.
taiwan reported 355 domestic covid-19 cases on sunday, down from 486 on saturday.
total daily cases peaked on may 17 and have been falling since friday.
taiwan has reported 8,160 infections since the pandemic began, including 110 deaths.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
it is 3pm, and the perfect time for a spot of tea.
or in the words of 54-year-old gurdip singh, "oi, it's time to yum cha!"
yum cha directly translates to drinking tea in cantonese.
the singapore-based worker who maintains and repairs ships for a living has become somewhat of a viral sensation in china recently for speaking fluent cantonese.
but it's not just his command of the language as a non-chinese in the short 15-second video clip that had people paying attention.
the passion in which he extolls viewers to take a break from work is palpable.
armed with a packet of tea, he bellows at the camera: "have some tea first, what are you working for?
""no use working so hard, your boss won't love you for it.
have some tea first, it's three-something!"
he adds, using a smattering of expletives for emphasis.
the video has spawned memes and copycat videos on chinese video-sharing platform bilibili, where the most popular clip has garnered more than three million views within a month.
most recently, singh showed off his cantonese-speaking prowess in a video interview conducted with local chinese broadsheet lianhe zaobao.
he explained that he'd picked up the dialect while growing up in kuantan, malaysia, where his neighbours and friends were all chinese.
the polyglot is able to speak some mandarin as well.
he is quick to state however, that his command of the language is "not good".
"but my cantonese is excellent, i'm not bluffing you, it's really good," joked singh.
the ship repairman told zaobao that he had been living in singapore since he was 16, moving here to find work.
he had also spent several years working in russia before returning to singapore.
singh expressed surprise at the popularity of the video.
he told zaobao that the clip was recorded in march last year "pre-covid", but only went viral earlier this month.
it is not clear how the clip found itself onto the video-sharing platform and on social media, but he only realised people were watching when some fans came to see him at his office just last week.
"they brought a packet of tea for me, and told me that i'm famous in china," said singh.
one reason posited by netizens for the clip's virality in china is how it resonates with a generation of regular employees, especially migrant workers.
said one netizen in hong kong: "it speaks to the hearts of all blue-collared workers.
"with the recent media attention in china on the "toxic 996 work culture" as well as other societal pressures, it is evident that the video has struck a chord.
wrote one commenter: "those who don't get the video are not employees who have to do ot (overtime) and work hard.
those who do will feel that this foreign uncle actually cares about us.
"in the words of another netizen: "i feel unexpectedly touched.
i don't even care for myself as much as this stranger.
"with his newfound fame, singh has received offers of sponsorships and commercial partnerships, and has also been invited to set up a channel on the chinese video platform.
but before being known as "brother yum cha", singh said he used to have another nickname in singapore — "elvis".
"with my sideburns and style, people say i look like elvis presley," said singh, who often dresses like the iconic singer in a fitted long-sleeved shirt and leather boots whenever he is out shopping.
"a foreigner at changi airport called out 'elvis' when he saw me and even requested for a selfie," said singh proudly.
singh added in the interview that he enjoyed his holiday to hong kong with his ex-wife and children back in 2007, where he expectedly amazed locals with his cantonese.
"they were surprised and asked how long i'd been living in hong kong," said singh.
he hopes to have the opportunity to travel to china again in the future, and hollered for recommendations on where he should visit to "see pretty things", adding, "pretty girls, also can".
candicecai@asiaone.
com
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
sydney (xinhua) the australian scientist on a world health organisation (who) expert team sent to china on a covid-19 origin-tracing mission defended the team's findings, amid speculation about a "lab leak" theory.
in an interview with the australian broadcasting corporation (abc) last friday (may 28), university of sydney professor dominic dwyer, who along with scientists from other countries spent four weeks in wuhan for the who mission, said there was no evidence to back up the lab escape theory.
"the us intelligence forces were asked to show if they had any information that might be helpful.
they haven't done that as yet," prof dwyer said.
"the fact that president biden says he's getting conflicting reports from his intelligence agencies, to me, suggests there is no clear evidence, otherwise it would be obvious what was going on," he said.
"i think we just need to see the evidence.
if we've got it, let's act on it.
.
.
but show us the money," the abc report cited prof dwyer.
us president joe biden had ordered us intelligence agencies to carry out extra investigations into the source of the pandemic.
prof dwyer said the authorities in wuhan had been "pretty open" with the team during its investigation.
"the evidence we got and the questions we asked and the answers we got are really what i would expect if i was doing the same investigation in australia or new zealand or somewhere similar," he said.
prof dwyer said in the interview that it could take "many, many years" to discover the origins of diseases and that it would only be achieved through cooperation.
"you have to develop cooperation; you have to work with people in an open and transparent manner to get things done," he said.
"the more people fight about it, or people use politics to score points or whatever it might be, the less likely you are to get the cooperation to work together to sort it out," he warned.
"so i would plead that the diplomacy improves so that we can get on and do the science," he added.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
kuala lumpur: the malaysian government said on sunday (may 30) that all malls will have to be shut, while 17 essential service sectors will be allowed to operate during the impending two-week "total lockdown".
these sectors include healthcare, telecommunications and media, food and beverage, utilities as well as banking.
the government will also allow companies under 12 manufacturing sectors to continue operating, such as food and drink manufacturing, medical devices, textiles for producing personal protection equipment as well as oil and gas.
they will need to operate at 60 per cent capacity.
in a press conference, senior minister ismail sabri yaakob said: "we hope the manufacturing sector will follow the government's orders, because we have given the condition that only 60 per cent could work.
""but i've read social media posts and found employers who forced their employees to exceed the 60 per cent capacity," he added.
mr ismail sabri said that employees could report such breaches to the human resource ministry and the police.
shopping malls will need to close, except supermarkets and premises dealing in food and beverage and basic necessities, the minister added.
only two people from each household would be allowed to go out to buy essentials or for medical services, with movement limited to a 10km radius.
a statement by the ministry of international trade and industry also said: "the manufacturing and manufacturing related services sectors that are allowed to operate is to ensure minimal disruption to the supply chain of critical parts, components and finished products.
""this is essential to support the continued operations of critical infrastructures and front-liners such as security, healthcare systems, information and communications and as well as ensure adequate supply of basic necessities for the rakyat (people).
"the sunday announcement came after the prime minister's office announced on friday that malaysia would beundergoing a "total lockdown" from jun 1 to jun 14. malaysia's covid-19 numbers have continued to surge, witha record 9,020 new casesand 98 deaths on saturday.
on sunday, there were6,999 new cases.
there are now more than 560,000 cases nationwide.
putrajaya has assured people that there would be sufficient food stocks to last throughout phase 1 of the total lockdown.
however, there have been reports of lines of people flocking to buy necessities and goods in anticipation of tuesday.
during the same press conference on sunday, health ministry director-general noor hisham abdullah warned that a daily increase of 1,000 to 2,000 new cases was not impossible, and that the high number of deaths, such as 98 fatalities recorded on saturday, might continue and even rise.
"the health ministry has warned that a situation might arise where doctors might have to make the difficult choice, to give priority for intensive-care unit (icu) beds to patients with higher recovery potential, than those with poor prognosis.
"​​​​​​​​​​​​​​dr noor hisham outlined five actions that the health ministry would take during the two-week lockdown, including allowing breathing space for healthcare personnel and hospitals to reassess their equipment and speeding up the vaccination process.
healthcare personnel would also do targeted screenings in the field using the rapid test kit-antigen (rtk-ag) detection method for covid-19, he said.
more vaccination centres planned, private clinics to administer jabsearlier on sunday, minister for science, technology and innovation khairy jamaluddin said in a press conference that more vaccination centres will be opened in the coming month to speed up the vaccination process.
the first among these will be five mega vaccination centres around the klang valley.
"three will be in selangor and two will be set up in kuala lumpur," he said, adding that the set up would begin on jun 7. mr khairy, who is also the coordinating minister for the covid-19 immunisation taskforce said 1,000 private general practitioner (gp) clinics will be joining the national covid-19 immunisation program by jun 30. he added that 500 of these clinics will begin administering vaccines starting jun 15.
"i estimate that gps and private hospital vaccination centres can contribute and administer 40,000 doses in a day, and 400,000 doses (in total) by jun 30" he said, adding that this would be subject to the supply of the vaccines.
explaining that there were currently 2,500 gp clinics registered under the immunisation program, mr khairy said the government will be paying the private practices to administer the vaccines.
besides that mr khairy also shared that malaysia will officially start rolling out drive-through vaccinations for the public after a successful pilot project in a university in kota baru, kelantan .
"we did it in universiti sains malaysia in kubang kerian and it was successful.
we will now allow other states to start this for the public too," said the minister.
prior to the total lockdown, the government had begun tightening restrictions under a nationwide movement control order, dubbed "mco 3.
0" which started on may 12 and will last until jun 7. among the restrictions under mco 3.
0include 80 per cent of public sector employees needing to work from home, and 40 per cent for the private sector.
businesses can only operate from 8am until 8pm daily.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
the start of the year has bode well for some industries, while others continue to slump.
insight looks at what lies ahead for sectors at both ends of the spectrum, and the challenges that stand in the way of recovery.
the recent covid-19 resurgence may have baked in the prospects of an uneven and gradual economic recovery through the year led by the trade-driven manufacturing sector.
that suggests the pace of growth will depend on the health of external demand for goods and services produced in singapore a critical node for global trade.
the fear of surprise outbreaks of new covid-19 variants will ensure that some level of restrictions will persist on travel and domestic mobility through the year, even if the current heightened alert measures are softened in the coming weeks.
those curbs will keep sectors that are dependent on domestic consumption weak, leaving the heavy-lifting in the recovery process to parts of the economy that are powered by external demand for yet another year.
read more hereconstruction and transportation are still stuck in the doldrums and face a hard road ahead, even as singapore's economy looks to be on the rebound after its worst recession since independence.
these sectors, along with food and beverage services, real estate and professional services, are among those that recorded negative growth in the first quarter of this year, according to the ministry of trade and industry's quarterly economic survey.
indeed, the pandemic remains a highly potent threat, given the resurgence of infections in many countries, and will continue to weigh down growth prospects.
while sectors such as construction, and transportation and storage declined on a year-on-year basis in the first quarter, they are likely to see growth in the coming quarters, given the very low base seen last year amid circuit breaker measures.
read more herejoin st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
after a lifetime of 'blending in' to survive, employees who hide their autism may not get the help they need to thrive.
but some workplaces are changing that.
this is the first part of a series on adulting with autism.
singapore: a stranger might describe khor kuan min as introverted.
after getting to know the 37-year-old better, they might call him polite and articulate, with the occasional touch of self-deprecating humour.
those who are observant would notice that he has trouble maintaining eye contact.
but few, if any, might realise he has autism.
in his early 20s, he was diagnosed with asperger syndrome, which has been described as a neurodevelopmental condition on the higher-functioning end of the autistic spectrum.
this means individuals like him behave in ways the general population considers as normal.
the label "high-functioning" is contentious among the autistic community.
some who spoke to cna insider said it is based on a neurotypical person's understanding of "normalcy", implying that autistic individuals should display typical developmental and cognitive abilities to fit in.
a better replacement for "high-functioning", they said, would be "low support needs".
but kuan min does not mind the label.
"on the one hand, i know how important the words are.
on the other hand, being too sensitive may make it harder to encourage conversation.
there must be some middle ground," he said.
"as long as there's no offence intended and no egregious ignorance involved, to me, it's okay.
"he functions well enough to work in a typical office, namely at moh holdings, the holding company for singapore's healthcare institutions.
he has been there for about eight years — doing research and administrative work, among other things — since he completed a master's in english literature at the national university of singapore.
but there are challenges.
kuan min struggles with social anxiety due to his autism, especially when it comes to social interaction.
also, a lack of awareness and support during his formative years has had long-lasting effects on his stamina and physical and mental health.
although individuals like him would be able to blend in — if they choose — some companies believe that autism is not something to hide and that it can benefit the company.
so they develop hiring programmes to embrace these differences.
walking the talkinformation technology consultancy, avanade asia, has been one of these employers since it began a partnership with the autism resource centre (arc) in 2018. it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
as part of a five-step hiring process led by the centre, potential candidates get six to eight weeks of hard-skills training at avanade.
they are assessed on lab work, such as their performance on creating an app.
avanade also takes into consideration the candidates' interactions during the training sessions, before deciding how many to hire eventually.
with six autistic employees in its singapore branch today, the office has also arranged autism awareness talks to help their colleagues understand them as part of the onboarding process.
"arc provided us with training to let us know what autism spectrum disorder is," said tracy chan, avanade's human resources lead for southeast asia.
"what are things we should look out for?
what are the differences between neurotypical and neurodiverse adults?
why are autistic adults sensitive to noise?
why can't they make eye contact?
"i've learnt .
.
.
that when we engage with autistic adults or give them tasks, we have to be very specific .
.
.
give clear instructions and tell them why they need to do a certain thing, what the purpose of the task is, the output we're looking for and the timeline.
"this is to mitigate the anxiety some employees with autism might face when they do not feel in control of the situation, she added.
besides the training sessions — and a job coach from the arc attached to the autistic employee — all avanade employees have a career adviser.
for autistic employees, this adviser must be aware of their condition and how to interact with them.
"when we select a career adviser, we make sure we select the right one for the autistic employees.
we don't simply pick anybody.
the adviser has to go through the autism awareness training too, before we assign them," said chan.
if it works out, avanade believes employees with autism add value to the team.
marvin (not his real name), a back-end developer hired in september, has brought "stability" to the team, cited teo chen miin, his supervisor.
"he's a very detail-oriented person, so it's like a trusted pair of hands.
when you give him work, he's very thorough," she said.
"there's another autistic employee who'd ask for more work after she's finished her task because she doesn't want to be idling.
they want to show that they can provide value and impact on the work or even on our clients.
"in their shoesthe implications of the label "high-functioning", however, are hard to fully shed.
"i appreciate that there's an attempt made to distinguish (on the basis of the autism spectrum)," said marvin.
"we're not a monolithic block.
"but (the label) is still an acknowledgement that i'm not truly neurotypical, even though i can be hard to distinguish from someone who's merely introverted or low-key neurotypical.
it causes me a bit of stress because i'm aware there's a gap.
there are times i do wish i was normal.
"the 30-year-old agreed, however, that his inability to grasp the same assumptions, leaps of logic and automatic understanding of certain steps, as a neurotypical peer would, can benefit workplaces — especially if there is support.
"employers should do their best to clarify workflows, like clearly, predictably and specifically spell out explanations, instructions and requirements," he cited.
"for example, continuous learning, pursuing certifications, value-adding and proactively performing beyond the requirements of a task are broad and vague ideas.
explain what the expectations are, what it means to be 'exceeding expectations' and how.
"he said employees with autism often have difficulty exceeding expectations because "being literal-minded, straightforward and even rigid means we work towards objectives and have difficulty understanding the need .
.
.
to go beyond".
by clarifying assumptions, employers can ensure that everyone is on the same page.
"you won't have people coming in with different baggage and understandings.
otherwise, they'd wander off in different directions because they subconsciously already have different interpretations," he added.
over at moh holdings, when kuan min first started his job, he found it "difficult to socialise and network".
being around people outside his immediate family, he said, often causes "a terrible, constricting feeling" in his chest.
his "inclusive" team made work easier.
"i told them i was very uncomfortable initiating social contact and that i was more of a 'responder'.
i can respond well enough, but going out there and making something happen is beyond me," he said.
"i also mentioned that i wasn't comfortable engaging people personally, like public speaking or facilitation .
.
.
once that was clear, i assimilated well enough, since they were kind and accommodating.
"he added that his employer tailored his work to his interests, abilities and comfort level as far as possible and listened to any concerns he had.
"my bosses are very supportive .
.
.
and remain open to expanding my job scope and helping me fulfil my potential whenever i feel ready," he said.
nonetheless, it frustrates him that he has not yet reached his potential owing to his autism.
"i'm probably just as ambitious as anyone else, and being unable to fulfil that is distressing," he said.
"i accept that i may have to deal with isolation .
.
.
in my personal life.
but i can't accept that my difference makes it so much harder to earn a good living and realise my potential in a neurotypical-dominated world.
"yet, he does not believe that he simply can choose not to be defined by his autism.
"it's like saying your gender doesn't define you," he added.
"it doesn't define all of you, but it's definitely a fundamental part of your character .
.
.
i see autism in the same way.
"ultimately, "the autistic person must be willing and open to asking for and accepting help" in the workplace.
help is availablefor autistic employees such as marvin and kuan min, having a structured programme to support them, as well as their employers and neurotypical colleagues, is crucial.
this is where the autism resource centre's five-step process helps autistic individuals to find an ideal job fit.
first, the centre understands the individual's strengths, interests, motivations and past challenges they might have faced.
second, individuals are given various scenarios to assess how they would fare in social situations.
third, individuals who make it past step one and two move on to employability training.
the first part of this training, conducted by the company they are applying to, involves the hard skills related to the job.
the second part — handled by the centre — focuses on soft skills, like general workplace communication and habits.
"teaching soft skills could be as simple as giving them perspective," said arc executive director jacelyn lim.
"one of the traits of autism is being rigid in thinking.
sometimes autistic individuals might not understand what their boss means when he says something, so we teach them what these things would commonly mean in the workplace.
"these soft skills are crucial to helping the individual hold a job, because "autism is an invisible disability", added arc senior job coach clarice ng.
"some people on the spectrum may have gone through mainstream education and are academically strong, so employers overlook their challenges and expect them to perform work tasks like any neurotypical (person).
"fourth, after the arc believes the individual is ready to hold a job, they move on to job placement, where they work with employers who have indicated interest in hiring individuals with autism.
these companies include starbucks, united overseas bank, moh holdings and avanade asia, with various job scopes spanning data analytics to it back-end development.
if individuals are hired, the final step is on-the-job onboarding, including autism awareness talks for their future co-workers and supervisors.
this step usually also involves individuals sharing how autism affects them and how they wish to be supported at work.
kuan min and marvin found their employers in this way when they approached the arc's employability and employment centre.
as for a company like avanade, employees with autism help it to embrace "greater neurodiversity" in the workplace, said chan.
"if we can create opportunities for fresh grads or (neurotypical people), why can't we do the same for neurodiverse people?
"and if companies can .
.
.
come up with training plans for fresh grads, why can't we come up with training plans for (neurodiverse people)?
"it's just about making the effort and time and being patient.
"this is part of a series on adults with autism navigating the neurotypical world of work, marriage and identity.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
washington nine out of the 10 members of asean want a draft un resolution to drop a call for an embargo on arms supplies to the myanmar military in the wake of its feb 1 coup d'etat and the ensuing brutal crackdown.
a key reason for this is asean's need to keep open channels for dialogue with the military.
in a letter in response to a resolution drafted by liechtenstein, reportedly with the support of close to 50 other countries, nine members of asean, excluding myanmar, asked for the removal of a sentence calling for "an immediate suspension" of sales or transfers of weapons and munitions to myanmar.
reuters reported that the letter, which was dated may 19, said the draft resolution "cannot command the widest possible support in its current form, especially from all countries directly affected in the region".
further negotiations are needed "to make the text acceptable, especially to the countries most directly affected and who are now engaged in efforts to resolve the situation", it said.
"it is also our firm conviction that if a general assembly resolution on the situation in myanmar is to be helpful to countries in asean, then it needs to be adopted by consensus," the letter said.
the military's crackdown on protests against its seizure of power has, according to multiple reports, left more than 800 civilian protesters dead a figure disputed by the coup leader, senior general min aung hlaing.
according to him, the figure is about 300, including 47 police officers.
many hundreds more, including journalists, have been thrown in jail.
fighting with ethnic armed organisations in border areas has also escalated.
fresh waves of people fleeing violence have crossed into thailand and india.
several thousand civilians have reportedly been displaced by fighting in recent days in chin state in north-eastern myanmar, and are living in the jungle.
the economy is on the brink of collapse, raising grave concern over a potential humanitarian catastrophe.
the international community is in a quandary over myanmar, especially as china and russia back the tatmadaw the military in international forums.
in an april 8 article, former australian foreign minister gareth evans said: "the larger problem with which all of us have to wrestle is that almost any conceivable form of external pressure or intervention, short of unachievable military intervention, seems unlikely to have any really decisive impact.
"a special asean meeting on april 24 came to a five-point agreement with myanmar, including a cessation of violence.
it also proposed a special envoy for myanmar.
the regime, however, later said it saw the five points as "suggestions" and said the time was not right yet to receive an envoy from asean.
there is good reason, however, for the nine asean members to resist the call for an arms embargo, said mr bilahari kausikan, a former senior singapore diplomat.
"first, united nations general assembly resolutions are not legally binding," mr kausikan told the straits times.
"at best, they can be considered recommendations.
"secondly, myanmar's major arms suppliers are china and russia, which will not stop supplying weapons, so in effect the resolution would be futile, he said.
"third, (current asean chair) brunei is trying to get dates from the tatmadaw to visit with the asean secretary-general and needs the tatmadaw's cooperation not just for dates but more generally, for any sort of solution," he added.
"this is a resolution that will be ignored substantively, but politically may make the tatmadaw dig in its heels.
"join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
authorities in vietnam have detected a new coronavirus variant that is a combination of the indian and uk covid-19 variants and spreads quickly by air, the health minister said on saturday.
after successfully containing the virus for most of last year, vietnam is grappling with a rise in infections since late april that accounts for more than half of the total 6,856 registered cases.
so far, there have been 47 deaths.
"vietnam has uncovered a new covid-19 variant combining characteristics of the two existing variants first found in india and the uk," health minister nguyen thanh long said, describing it as a hybrid of the two known variants.
"that the new one is an indian variant with mutations that originally belong to the uk variant is very dangerous," he told a government meeting, a recording of which was obtained by reuters.
[[nid:527488]]the southeast asian country had previously detected seven virus variants: b.
1.
222, b.
1.
619, d614g, b.
1.
1.
7 known as the uk variant, b.
1.
351, a.
23.
1 and b.
1.
617.
2 the "indian variant".
long said vietnam would soon publish genome data of the newly identified variant, which he said was more transmissible than the previously known types.
the world health organization (who) has identified four variants of sars-cov-2 of global concern.
these include variants that emerged first in india, britain, south africa and brazil.
"at the present time, we have not yet made an assessment of the virus variant reported in vietnam," maria van kerkhove, who technical lead for covid-19, said in an emailed statement.
"our country office is working with the ministry of health in vietnam and we expect more information soon.
"[[nid:521516]]from the who's current understanding, the variant detected in vietnam was the b.
1.
617.
2 variant, more commonly known as the indian variant, possibly with an additional mutation, she said.
"however we will provide more information as soon as we receive it," van kerkhove added.
long said laboratory cultures of the new variant showed the virus replicated itself very quickly, possibly explaining why so many new cases had appeared in different parts of the country in a short period of time.
the health ministry told the meeting the government was working to secure 10 million vaccine doses under the covax cost-sharing scheme, as well as a further 20 million doses of pfizer's (pfe.
n) vaccine and 40 million of russia's sputnik v. the country of about 98 million people has so far received 2.
9 million doses and aims to secure 150 million this year.
urgent attention must be paid to the impact of this raging pandemic on our mental health, former nmp and mental health advocate anthea ong urges.
singapore: "it feels like deja vu," a young community worker said, a day after the tightened measures for phase 2 came into effect.
he remembers the stress and manic scramble to support children living in rental flats and transitional shelters for home-based learning.
he recalls helping migrant workers with food and essential items during the outbreak in the dormitories at the onset of circuit breaker last year.
just 10 days later, two friends with home-based businesses reliant on clients coming to their homes experienced heart palpitations following the announcement of the two-person cap as part ofphase 2 (heightened alert).
they are not alone in feeling nervous about the covid-19 situation in singapore.
calls to some mental health hotlines saw a spike on sunday (may 16), the first day of the latest phase of covid-19 restrictions, executives who run these hotlines tell me.
covid-19 has taken an emotional toll on uspsychologists have pointed out how stressors released over the uncertainty over livelihoods, routines and catching a deadly virus have created a sense of constant danger and exerted an emotional toll on us.
after a year of dealing with a raging pandemic, we have seen signs of increased stress and worry, even when singapore was doing well in curbing infection numbers.
more than nine in 10 singaporeans (91 per cent) have said that their mental health has declined in the last year, according to a study by aia last month.
the sources are multifold.
in the #areweokay poll by sg mental health matters conducted between march and april, 51.
2 per cent of respondents said the restrictions on social activities and interactions have negatively impacted their mental health.
forty-four per cent said that changes to work and school had a similar effect.
as cases ticked up in recent weeks, fuelling calls for a clean circuit breaker to be pulled, i would argue we should be careful not to do so lightly, not without preparing for the mental health support needed.
after all, during the circuit breaker last year, the samaritans of singapore received over 10,000 calls in distress, a 36 per cent increase.
over the same period, the non-profit organisation caregivers' alliance supported 11 caregivers, of which six had lost their loved ones to suicide and the remaining five struggling with family members attempting suicide.
(mental health groups have seen a surge in calls since covid-19 hit.
who are the people tirelessly manning these helplines?
find out on heart of the matter.
)it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
many initiatives springing up over past yearpeople focus on the financial costs and risk of deep economic scarring when restrictions slow recovery.
just as important but less talked about is the price of loneliness and social withdrawal, domestic violence and unresolved grief, not to mention work-from-home stress and the helplessness over an uncertain, volatile future.
there are baby steps to build resilience and support people as this coronavirus persists and should additional restrictions be required.
many government-led and community initiatives have sprung up.
a national care hotline was set up in april last year manned by officers trained to provide mental health first aid and refer cases to public healthcare institutions and community service providers to follow up if necessary.
these benefitted 30,000 calls as of october 2020. the ministry of social & family development also recently launched a 24-hour national anti-violence helpline for the public to report cases of family violence, abuse and neglect.
it is also heartening to see targeted efforts to aid specific groups, like the seniors go digital programme to help seniors connect online with friends, family and government services.
there is also a budding recognition that workplaces must step up where the stressors can come from work.
more employers, like the ceos and leaders i work with at the workwell leaders workgroup, have accelerated plans for employee mental well-being including work-from-home support programmes in the last year.
the big challenges for mental healthyet let's be clear about the enormity of the mental health challenges that lie head.
while we are better prepared for a second circuit breaker, we carry more baggage picked up from a year of economic uncertainty, pandemic fatigue and the emotional roller-coaster of on-off restriction measures.
the mental health divide has also widened, as pandemic measures have a greater impact on segments requiring more attention.
blue-collar workers and low-income individuals were the hardest hit by the circuit breaker.
incomes at the 20th percentile fell 4.
5 per cent in june 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, according to the ministry of manpower's labour force report.
last year's circuit breaker also shone the spotlight on isolation's ill effects on victims of family violence trapped with abusers, migrant workers confined to dorms and foreign domestic workers with little space away from their employers.
would people also know how to find help?
less than one in three (29.
7 per cent) of respondents to the #areweokay knew how to seek out subsidised mental healthcare.
reframing the conversations over mental healthupdates given by the covid-19 multi-ministry taskforce (mtf) have rightly been focused on the number and breakdown of infections, the ensuing control measures and economic relief support for those affected.
yet let's also hope that each mtf incorporates an update on mental health strategies included into our pandemic management approach and provide reminders on the mental health support resources available, as much as reminders to see the doctor if unwell or take a swab test if one has been to an area of infections have become commonplace.
"what gets measured gets done" is a maxim that should apply to the rate of infections as much as rates of anxiety, depression, self-harm, suicide and other mental health issues from this pandemic, an urgent call also made by psychiatrists and psychologists in the lancet.
the government had promised a whole-of-government review of all mental health policies in the budget 2020 parliamentary debates, an inter-agency mental health task force has been set up last october and three new priorities were announced during the budget this year.
yet more needs to be done urgently, including improving accessibility, affordability and quality of mental healthcare.
here is also where our national leaders could show compassion to acknowledge the dread and apprehension among those who have been quarantined or received a notification of possible exposure on their tracetogether app.
leaders can also demonstrate sensitivity to people's concerns and needs.
each day's updates brings a sense of fear reflecting uncertainties around elderly relatives who live away by themselves, employment, healthcare and family care for many even if others may just merely let out another collective sigh and move on.
the trauma experienced from covid-19 also gets repeated in varying degrees with every announcement of more clusters and each round of new restrictions.
this persistent covid-19 crisis is equally a mental health crisis.
not all of us get infected by the virus but all of us are affected by the mental health impact of the pandemic.
anthea ong is a former nominated member of parliament, a professional certified coach, a social entrepreneur (sg mental health matters, a good space, workwell leaders workgroup, hush teabar) and the author of 50 shades of love.
where to get help:national care hotline: 1800 202 6868national anti-violence helpline: 1800 777 0000samaritans of singapore hotline: 1800 221 4444institute of mental health's helpline: 6389 2222singapore association of mental health helpline: 1800 283 7019aic hotline (for aged and community care support): 1800 650 6060you can also find a list of international helplineshere.
if someone you know is at immediate risk, call 24-hour emergency medical services.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore the current three-cluster healthcare system here should not be further reviewed, health minister ong ye kung said, as he laid out plans for the healthcare industry at the ministry of health (moh) work plan seminar on tuesday (may 25).
the last reorganisation of these clusters was announced in january 2017, with six clusters merged into three – national university health system (nuhs), national healthcare group (nhg) and singhealth.
"there are pros and cons to being big or small.
big clusters have scale and comprehensive capabilities.
small hospitals can be agile and innovative," said mr ong, who took over the health portfolio on may 15.
"we should continue with the structure that we have. "
he added: "within each cluster, we will have to find ways to make space for skunkworks and make unorthodox ideas become mainstream.
bring out the best of both worlds. "
as part of the last restructuring, three of the existing clusters in 2017 were merged with larger ones, based on location.
this process was completed about a year later.
moh had said in 2017 that the reorganisation would allow public healthcare institutions to deploy their resources and capabilities more efficiently, and also offer employees a wider and deeper range of professional development opportunities.
with the change, each of the three final clusters  has offered a fuller range of services, encompassing acute hospital care, primary care and community care.
each cluster has a medical school.
for instance, nuhs currently runs the national university hospital and six polyclinics in the west, nhg operates tan tock seng hospital and six polyclinics in the central region, while singhealth runs singapore general hospital and eight polyclinics in the east.
all three clusters are expected to grow, with nhg set to operate woodlands health campus, which will include an acute hospital and a community hospital, when it opens progressively from 2023. singhealth will run a similar integrated facility in bedok north from around 2030. meanwhile, 12 new polyclinics will be added to the current 20 by 2030.  these include bukit panjang polyclinic, which will open by the end of this year and be run by nuhs.
mr ong said that rather than spending time reviewing the current cluster system, the ministry should press on with approaches it first laid out in 2016.  the approaches seek to shift the focus towards general health instead of healthcare, allow patients to receive care in the community and avoid hospital admissions, and increase care quality while ensuring value for money.
these will help to address long-term issues like rising government healthcare expenditure and heavily loaded hospitals.
mr ong said healthcare expenditure is set to hit $59.
1 billion in 2030, up from $20.
7 billion in 2018 and $10.
5 billion in 2010.  the 2030 figure will form about 16 per cent of the government's yearly budget, up from 12 per cent currently.
the urgent care centre in admiralty sees patients with urgent but non-life-threatening conditions.
photo: woodlands health campus
when system engineer loh xiu hui's right foot swelled up after tripping at home two months ago, she consulted her general practitioner (gp) in sembawang, but he was unable to diagnose the injury without an x-ray.
she was referred to the urgent care centre (ucc) beside admiralty mrt station the same day.
it is one station from where the gp clinic is located.
she had an x-ray done there and was diagnosed with a fractured toe.
her foot was placed in a cast and she was put on crutches.
in total, she paid about $300 in consultation fees and for the medical equipment.
ms loh, 24, was one of the approximately 4,000 patients with urgent but non-life-threatening conditions treated at the ucc since its opening last september.
the ucc at admiralty, the only one in singapore, is jointly operated by the woodlands health campus and khoo teck puat hospital (ktph).
dr lim eng koon, the centre's clinical director, said: "the majority of our patients' conditions belong to the mild and moderate categories.
"we generally see patients who require urgent medical attention but whose conditions are not life-threatening.
"about 15 per cent of patients were referred to it by gps, with the rest being walk-ins.
the centre complements the ministry of health's gpfirst programme, which encourages people with mild to moderate medical conditions to visit their gps first, rather than going directly to the emergency departments in hospitals.
launched in changi general hospital in 2014, the gpfirst programme was first introduced in the central region last year through the ucc and ktph.
patients referred to the centre by gp clinics participating in the programme receive a $50 waiver off the total fee at the centre.
dr lim said the medical centre largely sees minor injuries, suspected fractures, acute respiratory infections, the common cold, stomach flu and abdominal pain which make up about a fifth of all cases there.
he said that by treating such patients who require an intermediate level of care, the centre assists emergency departments in preserving resources for those who need them most.
ms loh said her waiting and consultation time totalled an hour.
"if i had been sent to the accident and emergency department instead, my condition probably would not have been considered critical, so i could have waited longer," she said.
the centre charges a basic fee of $90 for singaporeans and $105 for permanent residents and foreigners, with additional charges subject to the services provided.
fang yiyangcorrection note: this story has been edited for clarity.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
taipei: taiwan has not given up hope of eventually getting covid-19 vaccines from germany's biontech, health minister chen shih-chung said on sunday (may 30), a deal that taipei's government has blamed china for not being able to complete.
after recording just a handful of daily infections for months, taiwan is dealing with relatively large numbers of community transmissions, though infection rates are starting to fall.
it has only vaccinated around 1 per cent of its more than 23 million people but has almost 30 million shots on order, from astrazeneca, moderna and two domestic firms.
the chinese-claimed island has blamed beijing for nixing a deal earlier this year for biontech vaccines, which china denies.
chen told reporters that although talks for that shot had "somewhat hit the rocks", taiwan "has not completely given up hope" of obtaining them.
shanghai fosun pharmaceutical group co has a contract with biontech to sell the vaccines in greater china, including to taiwan, but taiwan's government says it will only deal with germany's biontech directly and does not trust vaccines from china.
outside of greater china, biontech has partnered with pfizer.
chen said that in late january, the covax vaccine-sharing scheme for lower-income countries had told taiwan it could get shots from pfizer, but on may 3 covax informed the government that would not be possible.
taiwan is under its second-highest level of curbs to stop the spread of infections, including limiting personal gatherings and closing entertainment venues.
chen said the task was to ensure those measures were being properly enforced, adding, "at present there are no plans or intentions for a lockdown.
"the government has come under fire from opposition parties for delays in testing and reporting positive cases, but chen said that was now improving.
taiwan reported 355 domestic covid-19 cases on sunday, down from 486 on saturday.
total daily cases peaked on may 17 and have been falling since friday.
taiwan has reported 8,160 infections since the pandemic began, including 110 deaths.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore: a 39-year-old man was arrested on saturday (may 29) for his suspected involvement in a series of car rental scams.
on may 16, police received a report from a victim claiming that he had been cheated by a seller on online marketplace carousell after responding to a car rental advertisement.
"the seller had offered the victim an attractive price for the rental of a car," said the police in a media release on sunday.
after the victim made a deposit via paynow, the man became uncontactable and did not deliver the car rental services.
police were able to establish the identity of the suspect through investigations and arrested him on saturday.
preliminary investigations revealed that the man is believed to be involved in several other similar cases of scams, said the police.
the man will be charged in court on monday for cheating.
if found guilty, he could be jailed up to 10 years and fined.
the police advised members of the public to be careful when making online purchases:it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
kuala lumpur: the malaysian government said on sunday (may 30) that all malls will have to be shut, while 17 essential service sectors will be allowed to operate during the impending two-week "total lockdown".
these sectors include healthcare, telecommunications and media, food and beverage, utilities as well as banking.
the government will also allow companies under 12 manufacturing sectors to continue operating, such as food and drink manufacturing, medical devices, textiles for producing personal protection equipment as well as oil and gas.
they will need to operate at 60 per cent capacity.
in a press conference, senior minister ismail sabri yaakob said: "we hope the manufacturing sector will follow the government's orders, because we have given the condition that only 60 per cent could work.
""but i've read social media posts and found employers who forced their employees to exceed the 60 per cent capacity," he added.
mr ismail sabri said that employees could report such breaches to the human resource ministry and the police.
shopping malls will need to close, except supermarkets and premises dealing in food and beverage and basic necessities, the minister added.
only two people from each household would be allowed to go out to buy essentials or for medical services, with movement limited to a 10km radius.
a statement by the ministry of international trade and industry also said: "the manufacturing and manufacturing related services sectors that are allowed to operate is to ensure minimal disruption to the supply chain of critical parts, components and finished products.
""this is essential to support the continued operations of critical infrastructures and front-liners such as security, healthcare systems, information and communications and as well as ensure adequate supply of basic necessities for the rakyat (people).
"the sunday announcement came after the prime minister's office announced on friday that malaysia would beundergoing a "total lockdown" from jun 1 to jun 14. malaysia's covid-19 numbers have continued to surge, witha record 9,020 new casesand 98 deaths on saturday.
on sunday, there were6,999 new cases.
there are now more than 560,000 cases nationwide.
putrajaya has assured people that there would be sufficient food stocks to last throughout phase 1 of the total lockdown.
however, there have been reports of lines of people flocking to buy necessities and goods in anticipation of tuesday.
during the same press conference on sunday, health ministry director-general noor hisham abdullah warned that a daily increase of 1,000 to 2,000 new cases was not impossible, and that the high number of deaths, such as 98 fatalities recorded on saturday, might continue and even rise.
"the health ministry has warned that a situation might arise where doctors might have to make the difficult choice, to give priority for intensive-care unit (icu) beds to patients with higher recovery potential, than those with poor prognosis.
"​​​​​​​​​​​​​​dr noor hisham outlined five actions that the health ministry would take during the two-week lockdown, including allowing breathing space for healthcare personnel and hospitals to reassess their equipment and speeding up the vaccination process.
healthcare personnel would also do targeted screenings in the field using the rapid test kit-antigen (rtk-ag) detection method for covid-19, he said.
more vaccination centres planned, private clinics to administer jabsearlier on sunday, minister for science, technology and innovation khairy jamaluddin said in a press conference that more vaccination centres will be opened in the coming month to speed up the vaccination process.
the first among these will be five mega vaccination centres around the klang valley.
"three will be in selangor and two will be set up in kuala lumpur," he said, adding that the set up would begin on jun 7. mr khairy, who is also the coordinating minister for the covid-19 immunisation taskforce said 1,000 private general practitioner (gp) clinics will be joining the national covid-19 immunisation program by jun 30. he added that 500 of these clinics will begin administering vaccines starting jun 15.
"i estimate that gps and private hospital vaccination centres can contribute and administer 40,000 doses in a day, and 400,000 doses (in total) by jun 30" he said, adding that this would be subject to the supply of the vaccines.
explaining that there were currently 2,500 gp clinics registered under the immunisation program, mr khairy said the government will be paying the private practices to administer the vaccines.
besides that mr khairy also shared that malaysia will officially start rolling out drive-through vaccinations for the public after a successful pilot project in a university in kota baru, kelantan .
"we did it in universiti sains malaysia in kubang kerian and it was successful.
we will now allow other states to start this for the public too," said the minister.
prior to the total lockdown, the government had begun tightening restrictions under a nationwide movement control order, dubbed "mco 3.
0" which started on may 12 and will last until jun 7. among the restrictions under mco 3.
0include 80 per cent of public sector employees needing to work from home, and 40 per cent for the private sector.
businesses can only operate from 8am until 8pm daily.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
guangzhou: a neighbourhood in the southern chinese city of guangzhou has been locked down as officials rush to quell an uptick in cases in the area.
home to nearly 15 million people, the industrial hub north of hong kong has reported 20 new cases of covid-19 in the past week.
a notice by the guangzhou municipal health bureau issued on saturday (may 29) identified five streets in liwan district in the city centre as "high-risk areas" and ordered residents to stay indoors until door-to-door testing is completed.
markets, schools and entertainment venues in the area were shut.
the city government has rushed to conduct mass testing, and about 700,000 people had been tested by wednesday.
china has largely controlled the spread of the virus and has tightened quarantine rules after a surge in cases in neighbouring countries.
the mini-outbreak in guangzhou is believed to be linked to a 75-year-old woman who tested positive for the virus variant first identified in india, local health officials said.
the total number of confirmed infections in china to date stands at 91,061, with 4,636 deaths, according to the latest figures from the national health commission.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
sidoarjo, east java: indonesian muanisah, who goes by one name, recalled the day when she held her 40-day-old baby in despair as he had trouble breathing.
she was just about to have her breakfast on may 29, 2006 when she smelled a pungent odour, which she believed caused her baby to cry while gasping for air.
"he was yawning .
.
.
unable to breathe.
i was afraid something wrong had happened to my child," said mdm muanisah.
unaware of what the smell was, she got out of her house but the odour was there too.
she decided to take public transport and seek refuge at her family's house a few kilometres away where the air was clean.
there, her baby could finally breathe normally again, she said.
"they (authorities) just said there was a gas leak," said mdm muanisah, who was 22-year-old at the time.
within a few days, it became clear that the cause of the odour was a mud flow bursting in the middle of a paddy field in sidoarjo, east java, just 200m away from mdm muanisah's house.
now, 15 years later, the mud flow has buried thousands of homes, factories and shops.
it is believed to be covering an area of more than 650ha currently and is showing no signs of stopping.
the sidoarjo mud flow has disrupted the lives of about 60,000 people, forcing them to flee or adapt to the unpleasant conditions.
the mud flow also produces methane, a powerful greenhouse gas that causes global warming and leads to climate change.
a february study by senior researcher adriano mazzini et al showed that the mud flow releases 100,000 tonnes of methane yearly into the atmosphere.
this is said to be the site with the highest methane emission ever recorded for a single natural gas manifestation.
people suffer from the mud flowthe cause of the mud flow is still a topic of debate until today.
some argue that the eruption was triggered by a 6.
3 magnitude quake two days earlier in yogyakarta, some 260km away.
there are also people who believe that drilling by oil and gas company lapindo brantas nearby was the culprit.
others think that the combination of both events may have contributed to the mud flow.
mr khudori, whose house was buried by the mud flow six months after it first emerged, is frustrated by the inconveniences.
"the smell was too strong .
.
.
and it also affected the water, (i got) itchy, it was polluted, we can't drink it.
previously, we could drink it before mud flow existed.
"after the emergence of the mud flow, sometimes if i take a shower, i'll feel itchy.
and the smell made me short of breath," said mr khudori, who goes by one name.
the 54-year-old was forced to find a new home about 1.
5km away.
"i can still smell it.
never mind 1.
5km, even at the distance of 5km it can still be smelled during the rainy season.
"if it's the rainy season, the smell of methane is very strong.
though when it is the dry season, it is not so obvious," said mr khudori.
he also observed that since the mud flow emerged, sidoarjo has become hotter.
"the mud flow releases heat," the father of six said, adding that floods seemed to occur more now.
he said there is nothing he can do about the condition, apart from turning to bottled mineral water for consumption.
a 2017 study showed that the mud temperature, which was previously 100 degree celsius, was 60 degree celsius.
meteorological agency data showed that the average temperature in sidoarjo has seen an increase of less than 1 degrees celsius in the last 15 years.
mr khudori, who used to work at a factory near the mud flow, now works as a motorcycle taxi rider with no fixed income as the mud had also buried his workplace.
mdm muanisah, whose house was buried by the mud in november 2006, has since rented a house about 5km away from the mud flow.
she said there is also nothing she can do about the complaints they have, apart from using a mask at home to repel the odour she occasionally smells.
"even before covid-19, i have gotten used to wearing a mask," she said.
embankment and pipes to contain the burstat its peak, the mud discharged was equivalent to about 25 olympic-sized swimming pools daily, said authorities.
to ensure that the mud flow does not continue to bury the surroundings, an embankment and pipes have been built to divert the mud to a nearby river.
the mud comprises 80 per cent water, said mr pattiasina jefry recky, head of sidoarjo mud control center (ppls) which is the agency overseeing the mud flow.
"the mud from the burst is about 60,000 to 90,000 cubic metres per day.
and we can flow about 30 million cubic metres per year into the porong river, but that is not enough because we are dealing with quite a lot of problems.
"the ships which (pump the mud) are old ships, so we can't work more effectively," he said.
in addition, the agency needs to ensure that the embankment is strong.
mr pattiasina said some geological experts predicted that the mud flow will ooze for at least 40 years.
"it has only been 15 years.
if the drainage and embankment protection is safe, then it is safe.
"we're only afraid of the rainy season because our embankment is an earthen-filled dam.
it was built in a rush back then.
for us technical people, a technical embankment should not be like that.
"he said that the embankment is 11m high.
"and most likely it can't be more than that.
we are afraid that if it is higher, it will collapse because the carrying capacity is not strong," he added.
proposals to make use of the mud flowmr mazzini, who is a senior researcher at the centre of earth evolution and dynamics (ceed) of the university of oslo, said the sidoarjo mud flow is something between a magmatic volcano and a mud volcano.
mr mazzini, who has studied the mud flow since 2006 and has visited the site numerous times, concluded that the mud flow is connected to the active arjuno-welirang volcanoes about 20km away.
the conclusion was made because the gas and water from the mud flow and the volcanoes are the same.
his latest study, which was conducted with his colleagues using a combined method of ground-based and satellite observations, showed that the methane concentration in sidoarjo is very high compared to other parts of east java.
most of the methane originates from the mud flow, according to the study.
government agencies told cna they do not know how much gas methane has been released by the mud flow.
mr pattiasina of ppls said there have been plans to make lithium batteries out of the mud, but as of now it is still being discussed.
head of sidoarjo's environment and sanitation agency sigit setyawan said the agency had planned to work with an energy company to produce biomass from the mud as an alternative source of renewable energy since 2019.
"however, the plan was constrained by the covid-19 pandemic," he told cna.
he added that the agency also proposed to plant productive crops on the land buried by the mud, which the government has bought from locals as the area was too dangerous to live in.
government has to do more: environment ngomr anung suprayitno, head of the meteorological, climatological and geophysical agency (bmkg) malang, said that even though the mud flow has existed for 15 years, more data is needed to conclude its impact on the climate.
the agency, which oversees the management of meteorological and climatological data throughout east java, said it does not know the full extent of sidoarjo mud flow's contribution to greenhouse gas emission.
while meteorological data in the last 15 years shows that the temperature at sidoarjo has increased by less than 1 degree celsius and rainfall has increased in a small amount, mr suprayitno said the agency does not know if the mud flow is an reinforcing factor that accelerates the local scale of climate change.
mr rere christanto, who is the director executive of environmental non-governmental organisation walhi east java, said that there has been an increase in disasters over the past few years in east java especially floods and landslides.
the sidoarjo mud flow is part of a site that accounts for the largest emission of methane gas, and hence it has a big role to play in the build-up of greenhouse gas emissions in the atmosphere, he said.
he said it is important that the government acknowledges this and does more than discharging the water sludge into the porong river.
the government has to analyse the mud and look into the possible extent and danger of its content, he said.
"now, if we have a threat map, we can imagine what actions the government can take and then take precautions.
how large the area is and where.
for example, the community can be given masks to wear.
"but it won't happen if the government doesn't want to admit (that the site releases huge amounts of methane).
"it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
ottawa: a canadian member of parliament has stepped down from some of his duties and said he is seeking "assistance" after being caught on camera urinating during a video conference in parliament,a month after appearing nakedin another virtual session.
"last night, while attending house of commons proceedings virtually, in a non-public setting, i urinated without realising i was on camera," mp william amos wrote on his twitter account on thursday (may 27) night.
"i am deeply embarrassed by my actions and the distress they may have caused anybody who witnessed them," he added.
"while accidental and not visible to the public, this was completely unacceptable, and i apologise unreservedly.
"in april, the mp was caught standing naked between the flags of canada and quebec, his private parts hidden by his phone, while connected by video to a question time session in parliament.
amos, a member of prime minister justin trudeau's liberal party, also claimed that was an accident.
in the most recent episode, he was caught urinating into a coffee cup, the conservative opposition said in a statement.
"this is the second time mr amos has been caught exposing himself to his colleagues in the house, and the house of commons, virtual or otherwise, must be free of this type of unacceptable behaviour," said conservative mp karen vecchio.
"this is a pattern of behaviour from mr amos and it's now clear that trudeau's liberals failed in their duty to ensure a safe work environment following the first incident," she hammered in a statement.
amos, 46, announced he was "temporarily" stepping down from some of his parliamentary duties while continuing to represent his constituency.
he added that he would seek "assistance" but did not specify what that would be.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore their work places them at risk of infection.
yet they serve without misgivings, and with a smile.
the straits times writers pay tribute to singapore's front-liners – from nurses to taxi drivers, cleaners to food delivery riders – who place duty before self and even go the extra mile.
an organised calm was my welcome home last sunday night at changi airport.
go left, join this line, sit down, be tested.
order amid tension is reassuring.
i had arrived from delhi and was greeted in the terminal by a stream of front-line workers, who spend their days dealing with visitors from disparate lands.
i wondered, are they nervous?
i would be.
under those gloves, gowns and masks were humans, after all.
they had families and futures.
they had read the papers and knew about clusters and strains.
still all i got from them was evenness, generosity and courtesy.
they were bound by duty.
read more hereon the 20th night of my 21-day quarantine, my ceiling started leaking.
fat blobs of water appeared under the false ceiling housing the air-conditioning vent, eventually hitting the carpet of my swissotel stamford room at a rhythm that seemed to quicken with the minute.
but i was in the middle of an important videoconference call.
i dragged my trash bin under the leaking spot, hoping it would hold out for an hour or two, but quickly realised the situation was urgent.
read more herewhen my mother lost her sense of taste and smell after she got covid-19 in april, she lost whatever appetite she used to have.
meat, in particular, became repulsive to her.
worried about the lack of protein in her diet, i decided to order and have delivered to her fish collagen soup, which is easier to swallow.
the soup comes in vacuum-sealed cups.
upon hearing about my mother, the staff at the company ao broth took it upon themselves to shrink-wrap each cup for added hygiene.
read more hereover the past two weeks, my meals have been mostly delivered because i write a column reviewing delivery food for this paper.
on a couple of occasions, the food got to me more than an hour after the stipulated time and i was really hungry by then.
my first impulse was to call the delivery rider and ask him what was happening, but in the end, i did not.
read more herei was feeling indignant.
it had been almost 36 hours since my eight-year-old son isaac was issued a quarantine order after we were informed on may 13 that he had been in close contact with a covid-19 case in st andrew's junior school.
he and i had spent the whole day on tenterhooks waiting to be taken to a quarantine facility.
so when certis officer vic arrived at 11.
15pm to escort us on the van ride to the facility, i was ready to voice my displeasure.
read more hereit took an hour for our taxi to inch from the gate of the test-swab centre to the carpark, a distance i could have walked in less than five minutes.
my son and i were getting our exit swabs at the former da qiao primary school last tuesday (may 25).
if the covid-19 tests were negative, we would be able to check out of the mercure singapore on stevens hotel where we had been serving our quarantine order.
read more hereif you have stories or pictures you would like to share about front-liners in singapore's fight against covid-19, please e-mail stforum@sph.
com.
sgjoin st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
the remains of 215 children, some as young as three years old, were found at the site of a former residential school for indigenous children, a discovery canadian prime minister justin trudeau described as heartbreaking on friday.
the children were students at the kamloops indian residential school in british columbia that closed in 1978, according to the tk'emlúps te secwépemc nation, which said the remains were found with the help of a ground penetrating radar specialist.
"we had a knowing in our community that we were able to verify," tk'emlúps te secwépemc chief rosanne casimir said in a statement.
"at this time, we have more questions than answers.
"canada's residential school system, which forcibly separated indigenous children from their families, constituted "cultural genocide," a six-year investigation into the now-defunct system found in 2015. the report documented horrific physical abuse, rape, malnutrition and other atrocities suffered by many of the 150,000 children who attended the schools, typically run by christian churches on behalf of ottawa from the 1840s to the 1990s.
it found more than 4,100 children died while attending residential school.
the deaths of the 215 children buried in the grounds of what was once canada's largest residential school are believed to not have been included in that figure and appear to have been undocumented until the discovery.
trudeau wrote in a tweet that the news "breaks my heart it is a painful reminder of that dark and shameful chapter of our country's history.
"in 2008, the canadian government formally apologized for the system.
the tk'emlúps te secwépemc nation said it was engaging with the coroner and reaching out to the home communities whose children attended the school.
they expect to have preliminary findings by mid-june.
in a statement, british columbia assembly of first nations regional chief terry teegee called finding such grave sites "urgent work" that "refreshes the grief and loss for all first nations in british columbia. "
singapore — a 95-year-old singaporean woman died on sunday (30 may) from covid-19 infection, the ministry of health said on the same day.
the woman, the 33rd covid-19 linked fatality in singapore, was linked to the changi airport terminal 3 cluster, which has 108 cases as of sunday.
the cluster originated from an 88-year-old singaporean man who is employed by ramky cleantech services as a cleaner deployed at terminal 3.  he was confirmed to have covid-19 infection on 5 may.
the woman was confirmed to have covid-19 infection on 17 may when she was warded at changi general hospital for an unrelated medical condition.
she had not been vaccinated against covid-19, and had a history of cancer, hypertension and hypothyroidism.
changi general hospital has reached out to her family and is extending assistance to them, the moh said.
on sunday, moh reported 25 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,028. there are 19 cases of locally transmitted infection, of which 13 are linked to past cases.
stay in the know on-the-go: join yahoo singapore's telegram channel at http://t.
me/yahoosingaporerelated stories:singapore detects 19 local covid-19 infections, 6 imported casespm lee to speak on singapore's covid-19 plans at 4pm on mondaysri lankan authorities sunday said they will sue the owners of a singapore-registered cargo carrier which has burned for 11 straight days off the island's west coast and caused some of its worst-ever marine pollution.
british prime minister boris johnson married his fiancee carrie symonds in a "secret ceremony" on saturday, uk media reports said.
$6,600「」,$100「」gavin macleod, a veteran supporting actor best known for his role as an ever-smiling cruise ship captain on the 1970s-80s sitcom "the love boat," died saturday at the age of 90. ukraine's ambassador to thailand died early sunday on the southern beach island of koh lipe while on vacation with his son, police said, with the cause of death still undetermined.
us president joe biden's administration announced friday it will not return to the open skies treaty, which donald trump withdrew from, signaling a toughening stance against russia.
yahoo,,,『,』,!the ministry of health (moh) on saturday (29 may) confirmed 33 new covid-19 cases in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,003. the ministry of health (moh) on sunday (30 may) confirmed the detection of 25 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,028. israeli and egyptian officials held talks in both countries sunday aimed at bolstering the cairo-brokered ceasefire that ended the latest deadly flare-up of violence between the jewish state and gaza's hamas rulers.
《!》ut,!the minimum occupation period is the period of time that you are required to physically occupy your flat before you can sell it on the open market.
the post minimum occupation period exemptions given to 4,500 households in last 3 years appeared first on icompareloan.
vietnam has discovered a new covid-19 variant which spreads quickly by air and is a combination of the indian and british strains, health officials confirmed saturday.
the theory that covid-19 might be the result of scientific experiments has thrown a spotlight on the work of the world's most secure biolabs.
,《》《》,,!prime minister lee hsien loong will deliver a live speech on monday (31 may) regarding singapore's approach to reopening while also controlling the spread of covid-19 within its borders.
jessica liu, president of lazada group, is leaving the southeast asian online shopping unit of alibaba group holding ltd. more than 20 horses have died of starvation in just one month at bangladesh's most popular resort district, the animals' owners said sunday, as the country's tourism industry reels from the pandemic's economic fallout.
all asset classes.
industry-leading prices.
user-friendly investing online.
residents of a small french town laid cards and flowers saturday at the spot where a "very kind" and "gentle" policewoman was seriously wounded in a knife attack the day before, the latest in a spate of attacks on officers.
six hundred russian soldiers requested by the central african republic this month are "unarmed instructors," moscow's deputy ambassador to the united nations said friday.
the us customs agency announced friday it would block imports of products from china's dalian ocean fishing co for alleged use of forced labor and abuse of workers on its tuna vessels.
,.
16. ,!russian president vladimir putin took belarus strongman alexander lukashenko for a boat trip on saturday as the close allies met for a second day and held "informal talks" amid the outcry after minsk diverted a european plane.
"yesterday was the day of official talks and today it's informal," kremlin spokesman dmitri peskov told reporters of the meetings in sotchi on the black sea.
libya's military strongman khalifa haftar is polishing his political image ahead of elections, after a crippling rout on the battlefield and with his support waning at home and abroad, analysts say.
canadian health authorities announced saturday they were pushing back the expiration date on nearly 50,000 doses of astrazeneca coronavirus vaccine by one month.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore over the past two weeks, my meals have been mostly delivered because i write a column reviewing delivery food for this paper.
on a couple of occasions, the food got to me more than an hour after the stipulated time and i was really hungry by then.
my first impulse was to call the delivery rider and ask him what was happening, but in the end, i did not.
the food would not have arrived any quicker because i am sure he was doing his best, and harassing him would only spoil his day for no other reason than for me to let off some steam.
and i certainly would not want him to get into an accident because of the extra stress.
with eateries closed and many people refraining from going out, delivery riders are essential in getting us our meals.
while we stay safely at home, they are out on the road every day, rain or shine, and putting themselves at risk as they move between eateries and homes.
you see many of them out on motorcycles, bicycles and even on foot, carrying what must be a heavy pack on their back.
it is not easy work.
but despite the pressures, many turned up looking cheerful and left with a friendly wish for me to enjoy my food before rushing off to their next delivery.
so even if your meal arrives late, give the rider a smile or even make a joke about how long he must have waited for it to be ready.
let him know you understand and appreciate what he is doing.
it will help to keep his spirits up and yours too.
if you have stories or pictures you would like to share about front liners in singapore's fight against covid-19, please e-mail stforum@sph.
com.
sgjoin st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
bangkok: ukraine's ambassador to thailand died early sunday (may 30) on the southern beach island of koh lipe while on vacation with his son, police said, with the cause of death still undetermined.
andrii beshta is a 45-year-old career diplomat who was appointed as ukraine's ambassador in thailand in 2016. the national police said on sunday that beshta was found dead around 5.
30am (6.
30am, singapore time) in his room at a hotel resort in koh lipe, an idyllic beach island popular with travellers for its crystal-blue waters.
"preliminary investigations showed no signs of him being attacked, no signs of a raid or violence," said a statement attributed to national police deputy spokesman kissana phathanacharoen.
the medical team first on the scene had wore personal protective equipment suits as a precaution to investigate the body, while authorities had questioned the ambassador's son ostap, who had shared the room with him.
he said his father had gone to bed around 11pm the night before, but had woken up at 4.
30am vomiting before falling unconscious, said kissana, who added that other witnesses were also questioned.
beshta's body was sent first to a local hospital for an autopsy, before it was transported to a police hospital in the thai capital bangkok for further investigation into his cause of death.
he has spent more than a decade of his career in thailand, according to the embassy's website, arriving first in 2007 as a counsellor to the diplomatic mission in bangkok.
he was appointed the embassy's deputy director-general in 2011, taking over as ambassador in 2016. it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore the rest areas for delivery riders and private-hire drivers that were set up about a week ago in two punggol coffee shops will be removed to prevent misuse.
these areas could become places where people congregate, and bring about community risk, said ms sun xueling, mp for punggol west smc, in a facebook post on sunday (may 30).
"i have been there a few times myself and seen some congregation of general workers which we had to rectify," added ms sun, who is also minister of state for education as well as social and family development.
the rest areas in the coffee shops at block 308c punggol walk and block 269a punggol field were set up about a week ago.
they were intended for use by delivery riders and private-hire drivers to rest and have their meal, said ms sun in previous facebook posts.
on sunday, she said that they can eat at open areas, such as void decks and parks, and that she had personally observed some of them taking their breaks alone in such places.
"and (the places are) safe, airy, away from crowds," she said.
ms sun also said the "pay it forward" initiative will continue at the two coffee shops.
this initiative allows residents to pay for drinks which the riders and drivers can then redeem.
"there is also a box for us to express our good wishes to them and donate free masks for their use," said ms sun.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore a 95-year-old singaporean woman died from covid-19 complications on sunday (may 30).
she was confirmed to be infected with the coronavirus on may 17 when she was warded at changi general hospital for an unrelated medical condition, the ministry of health (moh) said on sunday.
the patient had not been vaccinated against the virus, and had a history of cancer, hypertension and hypothyroidism.
changi general hospital has contacted her family and is extending assistance to them, said moh.
meanwhile, five of the 19 community cases on sunday were linked to a new cluster at ntuc foodfare at 308 anchorvale road.
moh said it is investigating cases of covid-19 infection among people who work there.
"our epidemiological investigations have found that there is likely ongoing transmission at the coffee shop," said the ministry.
the coffee shop was closed to members of the public on sunday and will reopen two weeks later, on june 13, to break any potential chain of transmission and allow for deep cleaning of the premises, said moh.
the ministry will also offer free covid-19 testing for members of the public who visited 308 anchorvale road from may 13 to may 30 to "pre-emptively mitigate potential risk of wider, undetected community transmission".
all visitors to 308 anchorvale road within that timeframe are advised to monitor their health closely for two weeks from the date of their visit, said the ministry, which encouraged them to visit a regional screening centre or "swab and send home" public health preparedness clinic for a free covid-19 test.
there are now a total of seven cases in the cluster.
read the full moh press release here.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore i was feeling indignant.
it had been almost 36 hours since my eight-year-old son isaac was issued a quarantine order after we were informed on may 13 that he had been in close contact with a covid-19 case in st andrew's junior school.
he and i had spent the whole day on tenterhooks waiting to be taken to a quarantine facility.
so when certis officer vic arrived at 11.
15pm to escort us on the van ride to the facility, i was ready to voice my displeasure.
but as soon as we spoke, i realised how self-centred i had been.
vic had been working the whole day because of the recent spike in covid-19 cases.
the least i could do was cooperate with a smile.
front-liners like him have been putting their lives on the line and working extra-long hours to tackle the current wave.
he must have been exhausted that day, and yet he patiently explained to me the details of the quarantine order papers i had to sign.
i was touched when he told me how heartened he was to see parents accompanying their children on quarantine and not just sending a guardian along.
the thoughtful officer even tried to engage my sleepy son in chit-chat to keep him awake on the journey.
all the other medical and security front-liners we encountered were similarly professional in their conduct, including those i quizzed over the phone about the unclear processes and lack of information during our stay.
most could not tell me more than what their department was responsible for, but they were always empathetic and reassuring.
raymus, the medical officer who went from room to room in the quarantine hotel one afternoon to swab the affected children, told me he was on a tight schedule.
yet, he did not rush through the swab, taking the time to connect with my nervous son, kneeling down to his eye level and calmly explaining the procedure.
and after the deed was done, raymus was generous with his praise for isaac.
i was also grateful to the staff at grand park orchard hotel for not treating us like the plague.
on a few occasions, when i opened our door to retrieve food placed on a table outside our room, i found myself cheered by human interaction with the outside world.
one hotel employee made eye contact and shouted a jolly "enjoy".
another, a senior who was distributing breakfast bentos, warmly called out: "it's nasi lemak today.
eat, eat!
"when we were finally released from quarantine on may 25 and had to book a cab home, i was worried that the driver would be hostile.
but no, mr ku showed no fear and, in fact, was curious to know more about our time in isolation.
our quarantine roller-coaster ride ended after just 10 days, but the covid-19 battle continues for front-liners working hard on the ground to keep singapore safe.
let us appreciate their efforts and treat them with the same kindness they have shown to the community they serve.
if you have stories or pictures you would like to share about front liners in singapore's fight against covid-19, please e-mail stforum@sph.
com.
sgjoin st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore the exponential rise in national healthcare spending cannot be allowed to cripple singapore's future, said health minister ong ye kung as he laid out the steps being taken to rein in costs without compromising the quality of care.
key to this is moving healthcare upstream by letting general practitioners (gps), polyclinics and community hospitals play larger roles, allowing "heavily loaded" hospitals to focus on patients who need specialist care or emergency cases.
"our current national healthcare expenditure has almost doubled from $10 billion in 2010 to $21 billion in 2018.  it will almost triple to $59 billion in 2030.  this exponential rise is worrying," mr ong told more than 700 healthcare workers during his ministry's annual work plan seminar, which was delivered virtually on tuesday (may 25).
an ageing population, coupled with a "buffet syndrome" of choosing multiple treatments regardless of effectiveness, with insurers picking up the tab, will force the government to increase subsidies "that we will find increasingly hard to afford", he said.
mr ong reiterated a three-pronged strategy, first mentioned at the debate on the health ministry's budget in 2016, to avoid this.
the first part of the strategy is to move "beyond quality to value".
this includes using drugs and treatments that are the most cost-effective.
there will be negotiations with suppliers to ensure that prices charged match the outcomes they deliver, he said.
another important element is to ensure "we do not inadvertently erode the spirit of co-payment".
"once there is some skin in the game, consumers will exercise prudence in healthcare spending and doctors will exercise more discretion in recommending the appropriate treatments," mr ong explained.
the second part of the strategy is to go "beyond hospital to community".
calling for expanded roles for gps, polyclinics and other primary healthcare providers in the community, mr ong said "the centre of gravity must shift away from the acute care hospital towards the community, with focus on appropriate care in the right setting.
"patients will benefit from less hassle, greater accessibility to care, and at lower cost.
"mr ong said that private gps can become an integral part of "the continuum for healthcare" alongside polyclinics, which are already regarded as community institutions.
"a gp's care for his patient goes beyond the four walls of his private clinic," he said.
"he can be the village doctor (who) understands the patient and his family, helps them manage chronic diseases; the confidant (whom) stubborn family members listen to; and often the link to the wider healthcare network.
"mr ong said that pharmacists, too, can play an important role, such as in educating patients on the proper use of medication, to reduce hospital re-admissions.
nurses trained in diagnosing and managing common medical conditions can also order tests and prescribe medicine, saving patients time and cost.
mr ong also said that patients in rehabilitation should "step up" and not "step down" to community hospitals and long-term care facilities.
he said that multidisciplinary teams can provide "the right care at the right site" for medically stable patients in those facilities.
community hospitals in outram and sengkang were opened in 2019 and 2018 respectively, while integrated facilities comprising both acute and community hospitals are in the pipeline for woodlands and bedok north.
meanwhile, 12 polyclinics will be added to the existing 20 by 2030.  three of them – in eunos, kallang and bukit panjang – will open by the end of this year.
mr ong also said the "beyond healthcare to health" approach – the third part of the strategy – will continue to be pursued, with intervention going upstream to encourage healthier lifestyles.
"whether it is war on sugar, battle with salt, alliance with exercise – the health promotion board and our clusters must integrate their efforts and do what it takes to reshape lifestyles.
"after all, we are the ministry of health, not healthcare.
"join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore about 60 per cent of the migrant workers of tampines north's new cleaning contractor have been unable to enter singapore to start work.
the 40 per cent of workers who are here have had to work extra hard, amid more waste being generated as people spend most of their time at home during the covid-19 phase two (heightened alert) period, said tampines grc mp baey yam keng in a facebook post on friday (may 28).
several mps told the straits times they face similar manpower shortages in their constituencies, urging residents to do their part to keep the estates clean.
some migrant workers have returned home and replacements are difficult to get due to tighter border controls here.
mr baey told st on saturday: "i know most residents are law-abiding and considerate, but for the few black sheep in the community, i hope they can be reminded to do their part and keep the estate clean. "
he said the new contractor took over on april 1, adding that the workers here are doing their best to keep the neighbourhood's common areas clean, even as they have to dispose of more garbage – such as food and online delivery packages – than before.
there are also more instances of trash being disposed of inappropriately, he said.
in one case, a resident living on the third storey of a block had complained that his rubbish chute was overflowing.
when the town council investigated, it found that someone had thrown laundry poles down the chute, clogging it.
rubbish piled up as a result.
mr lim biow chuan, the mp for mountbatten and chairman of marine parade town council, said manpower has been stretched during this period, amid the increase in garbage volume.
he also highlighted the issues that could arise from indiscriminate littering.
litter such as food waste could attract vermin, while food containers could be receptacles for water and turn into mosquito breeding grounds, he said.
rubbish piled up in corridors can also pose a fire hazard, mr lim added.
while there has not been an increase in dengue cases in his constituency, "you just need one instance and you can get a lot of mosquitoes from one site", he added.
according to the national environment agency (nea) website, there were three red dengue clusters – areas with 10 or more cases of dengue – as at friday.
these are in rosewood drive, tuas south boulevard and cashew terrace.
mr liang eng hwa, the mp for bukit panjang, said the issues of manpower shortage are faced not just by cleaning contractors, but also contractors doing maintenance and repair work, and horticulture.
he said some hot spots for litter have been identified, and the nea has started to conduct surveillance and enforcement.
cleaners doing manual waste collection from blocks in bidadari on may 8, 2021, after the pneumatic system choked up due to improper waste disposal.
st photo: khalid baba

birds feeding from a pail of trash below a block of flats in toa payoh central on may 20, 2021.   st photo: kua chee siong
"we are also looking at our own ways to do surveillance, such as with mobile (closed-circuit television cameras), to monitor the hot spots," he added.
mr lim said his town council is working with the nea to step up enforcement against high-rise littering.
"but you can do only so much with enforcement.
we hope our residents do their part too and not take the cleaners for granted, or we will never have a clean estate," he said.
"we hope to send the message that clearing rubbish is something everyone has a responsibility to do.
"mr kane tan, a resident in nee soon east, said his estate is quite clean, although he does notice littering and some bulky rubbish in common areas at times.
the 45-year-old project manager said the clearing of rubbish is everyone's responsibility and that there could be more effort to educate people not to litter.
mr nicholas makoto, 28, who lives in shunfu, is concerned about items such as food packets and drink cans that are left around, as well as litter thrown out of windows.
the freelance animator said: "for the workers who have to pick up these stray pieces of trash – that just hinders them from doing their job smoothly, on top of the added work they are given.
"join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore on the 20th night of my 21-day quarantine, my ceiling started leaking.
fat blobs of water appeared under the false ceiling housing the air-conditioning vent, eventually hitting the carpet of my swissotel stamford room at a rhythm that seemed to quicken with the minute.
but i was in the middle of an important videoconference call.
i dragged my trash bin under the leaking spot, hoping it would hold out for an hour or two, but quickly realised the situation was urgent.
i called the hotel hotline.
a technician appeared at my door a few minutes later.
he was wearing an n95 mask and full personal protective equipment, and held a ladder and suction machine of some sort.
eighteen months of this pandemic have completely upended social conventions.
we have been taught to avoid confined spaces, close contact, and even the very act of speaking for fear of passing on the covid-19 pathogen.
faced with a technician in my hotel room, i wasn't sure how much small talk to make to be polite, or how much silence to keep to assure him of safety.
but he seemed to understand.
quietly, he removed the false ceiling panel to identify the problem, as i rushed back to my call.
after a while, he warned: "this is going to be a bit noisy. "
i put my earphones on to concentrate as he began to remove water that had pooled overhead.
i wasn't sure how much time had passed, but the next time i looked, he was gently closing the door behind him.
the dripping had stopped.
the ceiling had been wiped dry.
my trash bin had been emptied of water and placed in its usual corner.
i never got to thank him for his quiet, dignified service.
if you have stories or pictures you would like to share about front liners in singapore's fight against covid-19, please e-mail stforum@sph.
com.
sgjoin st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
bangkok (bloomberg) charoen pokphand foods, thailand's biggest meat producer, will close its factory in saraburi province for five days to stem the novel coronavirus outbreak, according to the provincial government.
the poultry processing plant, some 100km north of bangkok, will be shut from sunday (may 30) to thursday, the provincial administration said on its facebook page late saturday.
the closure came after the authorities found 245 employees had been infected with the virus.
south-east asia's second-biggest economy is battling with a new wave of covid-19 infections that have spread into prisons, lower socio-economic status regions and factories.
glove maker sri trang gloves (thailand) and electronic products and equipment manufacturer cal-comp electronics (thailand) closed some of their production sites this month to stem the spread of coronavirus among employees.
the cp foods factory has about 5,800 employees.
the provincial authority said it set up a field hospital at the factory to treat those infected.
cp foods will start the disinfection process and tighten health measures at the factory during the closure, the company said in a statement.
the company has moved the production of this factory to 18 other poultry processing facilities, it said.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore: their businesses may have been hit hard, their dance floors converted to pop-up restaurants and their karaoke rooms turned into work spaces, but operators of nightlife and entertainment businesses say that there remains hope for the industry amid the covid-19 pandemic.
speaking to cna, chief executive officer of zouk group andrew li noted that the demand for the industry remains.
"we're a species that needs that social kind of element .
.
.
for example, when you saw dining coming out, dining was flying because people just wanted to go out and eat.
they wanted to have fun with their friends," he said.
"and i think bars and nightlife are another level of that, where it is even more sociable and i think that's very, very important to us as a society.
"havefun karaoke founder mr flint lu echoed such sentiments, pointing out that socialising is an "essential need".
"we are still confident about (the) post-covid market.
so we have no other way but to stick to the plan of how to survive this pandemic," explained mr lu.
ms jean teo, who is a director at teo heng karaoke, said that karaoke singing is part of the "lifestyle" in singapore.
"we find that there are a lot of people who really love singing," she told cna.
"it has become a way for us to express ourselves.
and it's also very good for our mental health, it helps us to really relieve our emotions and de-stress and all that.
i get a lot of feedback from people, that once we are open, they will definitely come and support (us).
"singapore nightlife business association (snba) president joseph ong noted that many in the industry would like to return.
"they need the nightlife to be vibrant, in order for them to do well .
.
.
so we definitely have to bring that part of the business back.
but in a safe manner, in a careful manner," he told cna.
alcohol suppliers had also told him that sales in supermarkets are "higher than ever before", mr li noted.
"people are definitely still drinking, they're just not drinking in restaurants and bars they are drinking at home.
so that for me is the indication that people still need that," he said.
"but definitely, i think here in singapore, people want to (re-)enter the space in a safe way.
"but first, business owners will need to grit their teeth through the pain, with the latest challenge being singapore's phase 2 (heightened alert).
as part of the move, a series of measures have been put into place in order to tackle a spike in covid-19 community cases.
one of these measures has been the prohibiting of dining-in, which is currently forbidden from may 16 through jun 13. mr li noted that the latest measures have been an additional challenge to zouk, which had already changed its business in a number of ways.
pointing to how it had transformed its capital lounge space into pop-up restaurant capital kitchen, mr li said that its atmosphere had been a big draw for customers.
with dining in not allowed, there is less of an incentive for customers to order food to go, he pointed out.
"people were sitting down and they were enjoying themselves and you could hear the sound and stuff, so it was the closest they could get to what capital was in the past," he said.
"when you take all that away that social part and then also the music and vibe and stuff and you're just saying okay we're going to deliver you fish and chips .
.
.
.
that is something that's been very, very tough for us.
"mr ong noted that the current state of play means that some bars and pubs have moved into an "almost shut down" position.
in the 'triple target zone'but even before the newest measures, industry players had already faced a number of struggles, said mr ong, who is also founder and managing director of 1-group, which owns a number of clubs and bars.
karaoke joints, along with pubs and bars without food licences, nightclubs and discotheques, have been shuttered since march 2020 as part of singapore's measures to stem the covid-19 pandemic.
even as singapore gradually reopened its economy and allowed most activities to resume, nightlife venues have remained closed due to the higher risk of coronavirus transmission.
in october last year, education minister lawrence wong, who is the co-chair of the multi-ministry task force on covid-19, noted that the nightlife industry had to be prepared for "quite a long period of restrictions".
"we know these are higher-risk settings.
the nature of the activities themselves, of such activities, means that you have people socialising in close contact, often in a small enclosed space and risk is very much higher," said mr wong at a multi-ministry task force press conference.
"the pandemic frustrates everyone, not just us," said mr ong.
"again the problem really for our industry is that we are in that 'triple target zone'.
we are a vibrant place, we are masked down, we basically encourage socialising and all that .
.
.
so it is a triple whammy in terms of this is the kind of situation that the authorities want to avoid.
"and while some have managed to pivot and reopen as food and beverage outlets, not all have been able to do so successfully.
one of snba's goals has been to help businesses pivot as well as exit the market, noted mr ong.
it had been announced previously that nightlife establishments that wished to pivot to other permissible activities could apply for a grant of up to s$50,000 from enterprise singapore (esg) to defray qualifying costs incurred during the pivoting process, such as equipment and third-party consultancy costs.
nightlife establishments exiting the industry can apply to esg for an "ex-gratia" payment of s$30,000 to defray the costs of the cessation of business.
both of these support schemes are effective until the end of september.
should they be the recipient of either one of the financial support packages, the business will not be allowed to participate in the pilot programme or any subsequent resumption of nightlife operations for at least 12 months, the ministry of home affairs had announced previously.
snba has seen over 400 businesses deciding to pivot, while over 300 have exited the market, said mr ong.
"right now, none of us can operate the bars and clubs the way we were doing so .
.
.
some of them still hold on to the fact that they possibly can re-open.
(but) for many of them, they have already terminated their employees, they have already sent back their entertainers, they are in a very dormant mode," he added.
'losing less is earning'pivoting to an f&b business model has been a struggle, said mr lu, pointing out that the lack of mechanical and electrical provisions on premises means that it is a struggle to install a full kitchen set-up.
"the layout, the furniture we use sofas and tea tables, which is not suitable for f&b.
it is not a good setup for lunch or for dinner," he added.
"as a newcomer, with no professional chef team, no full kitchen and (a) limited variety of food and poor set up for dinner, lunch .
.
.
it's very difficult to catch enough customers.
"and despite havefun karaoke pivoting to a f&b model, the revenue generated was not enough to cover operating expenses, and the company's revenue dropped 90 per cent from pre-covid times, said mr lu.
this will be further exacerbated with the current situation, he noted.
"as no dine-in (is) allowed under the new restrictions, we can only operate (a) few outlets with take-away services.
revenue will drop dramatically and cash flow will be even more (of a) challenge," he added.
teo heng has closed four out of its 14 outlets, said ms teo, but has decided not to pivot to an f&b business model.
instead, it set up co-working spaces and study spaces in some of its karaoke rooms, beginning last month.
"there are quite a lot of supporters who come in, but, of course, it won't be the same .
.
.
as what we did previously," she said.
"this is more or less to help us to bridge over this difficult period .
.
.
by losing less it is already an earning for us.
"amid the continued pandemic, mr ong stressed the need for trials to test the feasibility of businesses operating.
"moving forward, sandboxes will probably be something that we have to push very hard (for), and i'm hoping that they will start doing that right after we manage the situation on the ground," he said.
"i believe singapore needs to adopt this attitude, where we should always be trialing or sandboxing certain entertainment, nightlife activities and all that.
"under a small-scale pilot for the nightlife sector, it was announced in december that three bars and pubs would be allowed to reopen for two months.
this pilot was later extended till apr 7. however, another pilot for nightclubs and karaoke outlets to reopen with covid-19 safety measures in place was deferred until further notice in january.
it was slated to start in the same month.
mr li pointed out that while it was important for nightlight businesses to come back in a safe way, the overall consumer experience would also need to be considered.
one of the criteria set by the pilot was that customers entering karaoke lounges and nightclubs would need to test negative for covid-19 24 hours before the end of the activity at the nightlife establishment.
alcohol also cannot be sold, served or consumed after 10.
30pm.
"the guests won't come if you tell them you have to have a pcr (polymerase chain reaction) test.
they're not going to want to do it i'll just go to a bar, i'll go to a restaurant, why would i have to go to a club?"
asked mr li.
"it has to be enjoyable as well, because if you're sitting in a group of five, and you can't listen to music, and you're going home at 1030 (pm), (you) might as well go to restaurants and do that instead.
so how we come back into that space, i think it's definitely going to need to be a discussion between us the nightlife industry and the authorities.
"mr lu pointed out that the reopening of licensed entertainment premises with "reasonable" restrictions could help tackle the issue of illegal set ups which he said currently operate in the face of restrictions.
"the previous customer base, they do have options for singing and partying.
even during this covid period, the legal ones are not allowed to open so there are a lot of illegal ones that are outside," said mr lu.
despite the doom and gloom, mr ong believes the pandemic presents a "watershed" moment for the industry.
"(now) we can really fully define it and because the slate now is almost clean, we can really redraw what we want and snba has a vision we want singapore to be the go to lifestyle destination," he said.
"the funny thing about the nightlife businesses is really that you have (the) majority of the operators in the nightlife business being people who view a glass half full rather than half empty.
so i believe that .
.
.
the nightlife (industry) will come back.
"it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore more than 5,500 phone numbers, believed to be used in scams, have been blocked by the scamshield application since its launch in november last year.
the app, which is managed by the national crime prevention council and the singapore police force (spf), has been downloaded by more than 119,000 users.
it is currently only available on ios devices, but a version for android systems is being developed.
the app was designed specifically to prevent scam smses and phone calls from reaching users, identifying and filtering them out using artificial intelligence.
users can also report scam messages and numbers via the app for the spf's anti-scam centre (asc) to take further action, such as blocking the numbers or contacting telecommunications companies to suspend or terminate them.
so far, about 722,000 smses have been reported.
ms reis chang, 23, a fresh graduate, downloaded scamshield in february.
she said: "i had been getting a lot of scam calls and messages on my phone, so i was quite annoyed by it.
"ever since i downloaded (the app), the number of scam calls and messages i've been getting has been close to none.
"ms chang also downloaded the app for her father, as she wanted to prevent him from falling for scams.
she added: "i'm afraid he'll pick up one of those calls and it'll say it's from a bank and then he'll find it very trustworthy.
.
.
so i downloaded the app and set it up for him so that such calls get blocked and filtered.
"assistant superintendent paige tan, a senior investigation officer with the asc, said that some of the most common scams reported via the app have been loan and betting scams.
but other scams were also detected, such as a bank-related scam late last month.
potential victims had received spoofed smses purportedly from banks, claiming that their cards had been suspended.
the messages provided contact numbers to call for assistance, and doing so would put victims on the line with a scammer masquerading as a bank employee.
once the asc detected the trend, it reached out to the telecoms companies to suspend the contact numbers involved, preventing potential victims from falling for the ruse.
the number of scams reported last year hit a record high of 15,756 cases, with more than $201 million lost by victims.
this was up from the 9,545 cases reported in 2019, with more than $120 million scammed.
asp tan urged more people to use scamshield to protect themselves and their loved ones.
she said: "the information (from scamshield) allows the asc to detect emerging scam trends and provides timely advisories to warn the public about the latest scam trends promptly.
"join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
while en bloc sales have their merits, the process of knocking down a building only to construct another comes with an environmental cost.
cna explores how collective sales can be done in a more sustainable way.
singapore: in 2002, olivio, a 36-unit condominium in novena was completed and welcomed its new residents.
but just four years later, it was sold en bloc and torn down.
to this day, it remains one of the youngest condominiums to have undergone a successful collective sale – which is when owners band together to sell their project to a developer.
since the 1990s, a few en bloc cycles have come and gone, with the most recent lasting from 2017 to 2018, before cooling measures put the brakes on.
analysts expected the trend tobud again this year, as developers seek to replenish their land banks, amid a property market that has defied the economic gloom of the pandemic.
four collective sales have taken place since january, compared to four in the whole of 2020, while more projects have been taking another stab at a collective sale.
the phenomenon owes its longevity to several practical reasons, such as allowing urban renewal and, often, a handsome windfall for those selling their units.
but some believe singapore's love affair with en bloc sales is becoming increasingly problematic, in light of its recent pledges to sustainability.
in particular, the country has crafted agreen building masterplanto reduce the carbon footprint of the built environment sector, which accounts for 20 per cent of the country's emissions.
the issue is that the process of tearing down and re-building is highly carbon-intensive, and especially wasteful when developments in good condition are demolished, said experts cna spoke to.
"it's not the building's fault it has to die"buildings in singapore have shorter average lifespans than in other cities, said professor thomas schroepfer, who teaches architecture and sustainable design at the singapore university of technology and design.
"when buildings are torn down, it's not necessarily because one cannot live there, but often it's economic drivers.
"it's not the building's fault it has to die .
.
.
particularly, because of a lack of development land, the pressure is really high to build bigger, denser, modern buildings," he said.
theoretically, structures can last a long time, with the world's largest unreinforced concrete dome, the pantheon in rome, still in "brilliant condition" after some 1,900 years, said ms alexis chua, course chair of the school of design & environment at ngee ann polytechnic.
signs of wear and tear can start showing as early as within five years, but singapore's building guidelines also generally ensure developments can last many decades, she noted.
dr lee nai jia, deputy director of the institute of real estate studies at the national university of singapore added that buildings are usually built to last for the tenure of the land.
he added: "while it makes sense to redevelop if the buildings become structurally unsafe, there were a number of developments sold en bloc that were less than 20 years old.
"data he compiled shows that since 1995, at least 51 developments that have been sold en bloc were less than 20 years old.
he added that there are no specific laws dictating the age at which buildings can be demolished.
environmental price of constructioncycling through buildings before their time is up creates environmental problems, said prof schroepfer.
"you have to take care of the debris from tearing down, there's steel, concrete, glass all materials that have high (embodied carbon), meaning it was very energy-intensive to bring them into life in the first place.
some of these are then recycled, but "it's not like other industries where the recycling rate is much higher", he said.
producing new materials, transporting them and starting construction kicks off the cycle all over again.
"so in terms of life cycle analysis, the tearing down and rebuilding is very energy hungry, and therefore not good for environment," he said.
for context, about 40 per cent of global carbon emissions are already from building and construction, according to the world green building council.
operational emissions form 28 per cent of this, while embodied carbon emissions account for 11 per cent.
in singapore, where the lifespan of buildings is shorter due to urban renewal, embodied carbon emissions could go up to 40 per cent, the council's chair, lisa bates, toldeco-business.
why do en blocs sales exist at all?the main goal of the collective sales framework is to give owners a choice on whether to go for redevelopment – which could allow for rejuvenation and land use optimisation, the national development ministry told cna.
for instance: "pipes start to leak, or you get analogue lifts and you can't get spare parts for these anymore, because people have moved on to digital lifts," said ms ong choon fah, the chairperson of the urban land institute.
"even technicians may not know how to service these lifts anymore, so you need to keep these buildings maintainable.
"in addition, when master plans raised plot ratios for certain areas in the past, en bloc redevelopment made sense, as they allowed developers to intensify land use.
"now we are talking about20-minute towns, and with covid-19 .
.
.
the role of offices have changed.
these collective sales and urban renewal helps us move on with planning intents," said ms ong, who is also the ceo of edmund tie & company.
on top of that, as singapore's ageing population grows while household sizes dwindle, older developments with larger units may not be "as relevant", said mr wong xian yang, who heads research at cushman & wakefield singapore.
in fact, collective sales can even contribute to sustainability by refreshing outdated infrastructure with eco-friendly features, said mr wong.
this includes incorporating more energy-efficient ventilation systems, air-conditioning systems, household appliances, and introducing more greenery in the development.
to boot, it is often a way for older residents to cash out on their property as they prepare for retirement, ms ong said.
en bloc sales are also a way for developers to get freehold property.
the only other way to acquire land is through the government land sales programme, but these are leasehold plots.
cultural loss and social displacementthough the collective sale process has its merits, critics have also cited disadvantages beyond the environmental damage.
prof schroepfer said: "remodeling of the city over and over would come at cultural cost.
even within a lifetime, the city – you can't recognise it anymore.
the places you grew up with are no longer there.
"ms ong cited how certain iconic post-independence buildings such as pearl bank apartments have been cleared as part of the en bloc process.
such sales also often lead to the displacement of communities – especially for older residents who may want to age-in-place.
as for the argument about making better use of land, mr nicholas mak, who heads research and consultancy at era realty, said that plot ratios for most areas have not increased in many years.
"(many of these buildings) are built to the maximum allowable plot ratio already.
"this means that for (more recent) en bloc sales, it is not because there is plot ratio to be increased, but because there is money to be made.
"changing en bloc laws?bearing these factors in mind, is there a need to change existing en bloc sale laws?in the past, 100 per cent consensus from owners was needed to put a project on the market.
currently, under the land titles (strata) act (ltsa), buildings less than 10 years old must obtain 90 per cent consent from owners before allowing the collective sale to go through.
those 10 years old and above require 80 per cent consent.
ruling out en bloc sales entirely for the sake of the environment or other factors would be too extreme, said experts.
instead, a more feasible change would be to tighten age requirements, said mr mak.
"say, instead of below 10 years, make it 20 or 30 years, such that any building less than 30 years old will need a higher percentage of consensus.
"another possibility would be to raise the level of consensus needed to 85 per cent and 95 per cent for older and younger buildings respectively, he said.
but other than that, there is little that can be done to discourage sellers from going en bloc, as the returns can be high, said dr lee.
indeed, a collective sale can give owners a premium of at least 40 per cent, compared to if they were to sell individually on the open market, said ms ong.
alternatively, given that the need for land is a driving factor behind en blocs, gls programmes could be ramped up to give developers more supply.
but this is may not be feasible in the long-run because there is a finite amount of state-owned land – and this varies from district to district, experts said.
for instance, supply is tight in the central business district.
rejuvenating without demolishinginstead, the best option may be to repurpose buildings that go en bloc, instead of demolishing them entirely, said experts.
"urban rejuvenation is possible without demolition", said prof schroepfer, pointing to examples such as the fullerton hotel, which used to be a post office.
ms ong also noted how the partially-conserved former national aerated water company has been integrated with a new residential development, jui residences.
leasehold apartment development tan quee lan suites is also housed within a refurbished old building.
government buildings that have been repurposed include the old hill street police station, which is now the office of the ministry of communications and information, and the old parliament house, which is now the arts house.
the concept of addition and alteration is also common in other territories, such as hong kong.
over in the united kingdom, a campaign – backed by 14 winners of the stirling prize, the most prestigious architectural award in the country – has also urged authorities to provide incentives for owners to upgrade buildings, instead of knocking them down.
but in the first place, buildings must be designed with "long-term thinking" to best facilitate the possibility of future conversions – and this requires an industry-wide change in mindsets, said ngee ann polytechnic's ms chua.
greening the building's life cyclethere are several steps that can be taken at each stage of a building's life to make it greener.
firstly, good workmanship and quality materials are the foundation in slowing future wear and tear, said ms chua.
energy-efficient systems should be factored in at the design stage.
the green mark framework, which measures a building's energy performance and impact, already requires baseline standards to be met by all new developments.
during the building process, more sustainable materials, such as timber, should be more widely promoted, said prof schroepfer.
to get more developers onboard with sustainable building, authorities could dangle the carrot of additional gross floor area as an incentive, dr lee added.
once the building is running, regular maintenance is important, said ms chua.
this can be taken a step further with pre-emptive maintenance via data analytics, which would prolong the building's lifespan.
when a building is torn down, demolition protocols have been put in place pushing the recovery of higher quality recycled materials.
but ms chua noted that "the rationale of current protocols in place could be re-examined".
for example, she said warehouses' traditional metal doors and gates are often dismantled as waste metal, instead of being given a new lease of life in another new building.
dr lee added that recycling waste should be further incentivized, while ms chua said more r&d efforts can be put into finding new ways to upcycle it.
all these moves may result in higher costs of development, warned dr lee.
this comes at a time when the construction industry is already suffering from an acute manpower crunch and rising prices.
these sustainable technologies will be expensive at the start, which is why the government plays an important role in supporting firms and start-ups exploring these aspects, he said.
"(this would help them) achieve scale and lower the costs quickly over time", he said.
striking a balancethe stronger sense of environmentalism that has emerged within society has seen the industry pay attention, experts added.
developers such as lendlease, cdl and frasers property have pledged to reach net zero carbon targets.
several local architectural and engineering firms have become founding signatories of a global petition, construction declares, committing to "take positive action" in response to the climate crisis.
amid an industry-wide push for more sustainability, green buildings are on track to becoming the default.
with these developments in mind, ms ong says a holistic approach is needed when squaring the merits of en bloc sales with their potential environmental impacts.
"it's not binary and it should not be a zero-sum game, but rather, a delicate balance is needed," she said.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
(reuters) when it comes to financial advice, you could listen to someone who helped steer more money than almost anyone else on the planet.
when he was chairman and ceo of investment giant vanguard group, mr jack brennan oversaw a company that has since grown to over us$7 trillion (s$9.
3 trillion) in assets.
that torch has since been passed to current chairman and ceo tim buckley, but mr brennan still has plenty of wisdom to share in his new book, more straight talk on investing.
an avid marathoner, mr brennan sat down with reuters to talk about how to pace yourself for the long-distance race of financial security.
a: what has changed for investors in the last 20 years has been very beneficial.
the cost of investing has been falling dramatically, which is a critical part of being successful.
there have been a lot of great product enhancements, like the ubiquity of exchange traded funds and target-date funds.
and the choice of how to get financial advice today is completely different.
everything is lower-cost and more available.
a: it comes down to simple stuff.
do your homework, be disciplined, be sceptical in avoiding fads, keep learning.
those are four elements i tell people all the time.
a: i worry about it a lot.
i don't get it, personally.
if you want to speculate on some individual stocks, fine, but your core serious money needs to be in a diversified programme.
it's very hard to beat the stock market.
there's an old joke that the quickest way to make a small fortune is to start with a large one, and then trade a lot.
a: we are all subject to emotions when it comes to investing, so there are a couple of things that are very important.
one is to tune out all the noise.
you shouldn't really care about what is happening today, or this month, or even this year.
i'm 66, and i hope i still have a 30-year time horizon.
the second thing is that once a year, you should reaffirm what you're trying to accomplish.
think about the issue in buckets: short-term resources, intermediate goals, long-term goals.
once a year, maybe on new year's day, sit down and look at it all.
you don't even have to do anything about it, but stay engaged.
a: the market is fully valued, in my opinion.
i think we will come strongly out of this pandemic, and there are a lot of reasons why equities are still an attractive asset class for most people.
you also enjoy the growth of those underlying companies and valuations.
if you had told me 11 years ago where the market is now, i might have said watch out, but there are justifiable reasons for it.
a: it's important to understand the role a bear market plays, which is to take all the excess out of valuations.
it's also a great chance, particularly for younger investors, to put their money to work at lower valuations.
go back and look at any period of time, even investors through the great depression, and you see that you will be rewarded over time.
a: boomers may not want to pass on quite yet.
but if you do inherit money, you shouldn't just take somebody else's advice.
you need to be a knowledgeable consumer yourself.
that's the big opportunity for gen x and millennials: to be smarter about financial issues than my generation was.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
by nick harris for the mail on sunday  published:  22:30 bst, 29 may 2021   |  updated:  22:30 bst, 29 may 2021    24view  commentsthe ioc will require all participants at this summer's tokyo olympics to absolve them in writing of any responsibility for illnesses or deaths from covid infections picked up during the games, a move met with widespread dismay.
every athlete and every member of support staff due to attend the event, scheduled to start on july 23, will be obliged to sign a waiver 'entry form', headed 'conditions of participation for noc delegation members', a copy of which has been obtained by sportsmail.
section 4 of this document begins: 'i agree that i participate in the games at my own risk and own responsibility, including any impact on my participation to and/or performance in the games, serious bodily injury or even death raised by the potential exposure to health hazards such the transmission of covid-19.
'all athletes and support staff attending the tokyo olympics this summer are required to sign a waiver 'entry form' which absolves the ioc and organisers of blame if that catch covid-19 a member of the philippines olympic team receives a covid vaccination ahead of the gameslater in the same section, the waiver reads: 'to the fullest extent admissible under applicable laws, i irrevocably release the [ioc and tokyo organisers] from any liability for any loss, injury, infectious disease or damage that i may suffer.
'although it is not unusual for athletes to waive certain rights at major sporting events, the ioc have not previously cited risk of death at a games, or sought exempt themselves from any responsibility in this way.
the world players' association a global body representing sportspeople have previously called for no waivers, saying: 'the ioc and all others responsible for the games have a fundamental duty of care to protect public and athlete health from harm.
'former team gb rower, cath bishop, an olympic silver medalist who is now a leadership speaker, writer and consultant, told sportsmail: 'it's an extension of what already exists, the ioc protecting themselves and taking away athletes' rights, but what to me seems odd is it's not accompanied by increased support [from the ioc], about what would happen if you did get ill and had a long-term health issue coming out of this.
'that's the concern for an athlete, getting long covid for example, without assurances that you'd be medically supported.
'former gb olympic rower cath bishop said there were few assurances of support if an athlete suffers the effects of long covid after the gamesmedical experts, the japanese public and now of the games' biggest sponsors are queuing up to demand organisers pull the plug on this summer's olympics.
bishop added that the ioc now acknowledging deaths could theoretically arise from the tokyo games is significant.
'look at how many people have died [with covid] over the past year around the world,' she said.
'it's a fatal illness and it's massively indiscriminate.
there are people who have died in their 20s and 30s.
it's not the majority but it happens.
'[the new waivers] flag up the greater risks that are being taken.
the language up to now has been 'it's safe, it's safe, it's safe. '
now this is clearly telling us, it's not safe.
'dick pound, the longest-serving member of the ioc, insisted the games will go ahead, 'barring an armageddon', even as more than 80 per cent of japan's population is against the olympics going ahead.
the ioc and organisers insist the tokyo games will proceed despite a public backlashthe head of the japanese doctors' union has raised fears the games could even help create new strains of covid.
bishop believes the ioc's determination to press ahead regardless is ultimately driven by money, specifically billions in tv cash that would be lost with a cancellation.
'it's totally being driven by a sense of 'we can't go back', and we'd rather crash than pull back at this point,' she says.
'it's just about [broadcasting ] contracts .
.
.
if you think about [ioc president] thomas back's 2020 agenda of credibility, youth and sustainability, that's in tatters now.
'you wonder what the longer term impact of that is, in terms of switching off audiences.
people won't watch it.
it won't be reported on [in the same way].
you've set quite a dangerous precedent there for the olympics not being the kind of event that brings the world together.
'it is expected that around 80 per cent of participants will have received covid vaccines before the games start.
around 80 per cent of participants at tokyo 2020 will have been vaccinated beforehand the tokyo organising committee had told sportsmail that they will also provide health insurance for participants during the games, but not after.
an ioc spokesperson said: 'the safety and security of all persons attending the games is the utmost priority of the ioc and japanese organisers .
.
.
the entry forms have been actually in place for previous games, and have been updated to include covid-19 related considerations.
'this is really to provide transparency and ensures informed consent from the games participants.
in addition, the entry forms are consistent with standard practice of other big event organisers and the forms are within the framework of the law. '
share what you think
          the comments below have not been moderated.
the views expressed in the contents above are those of our users and do not necessarily reflect the views of mailonline.
by posting your comment you agree to our house rules.
do you want to automatically post your mailonline comments to your facebook timeline?your comment will be posted to mailonline as usual.
do you want to automatically post your mailonline comments to your facebook timeline?your comment will be posted to mailonline as usual  we will automatically post your comment and a link to the news story to your facebook timeline at the same time it is posted on mailonline.
to do this we will link your mailonline account with your facebook account.
we'll ask you to confirm this for your first post to facebook.
you can choose on each post whether you would like it to be posted to facebook.
your details from facebook will be used to provide you with tailored content, marketing and ads in line with our privacy policy.
published by associated newspapers ltdpart of the daily mail, the mail on sunday & metro media group
london: british prime minister boris johnson married his fiancee carrie symonds in a secret ceremony at westminster cathedral on saturday (may 29), the sun and mail on sunday newspapers reported.
a spokeswoman for johnson's downing street office declined to comment on the reports.
the sun said guests were invited at the last minute to the central london ceremony, and said even senior members of johnson's office were unaware of the wedding plans.
weddings in england are currently limited to 30 people due to covid-19 restrictions.
johnson, 56, and symonds, 33, have been living together in downing street since johnson became prime minister in 2019.  last year they announced they were engaged and that they were expecting a child.
their son, wilfred lawrie nicholas johnson, was born in april.
the sun had previously reported that wedding invitations had been sent to friends and family for july 2022. it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
petaling jaya (the star/asia news network) malaysian doctors will be forced to make the tough call over which patient should be given a bed in the intensive care unit (icu) because of the sharp rise in covid-19 cases, the health ministry said on sunday (may 30).
health director-general, tan sri dr noor hisham abdullah, said if active covid-19 cases exceed the capacity of the healthcare facilities in the country, doctors will have to prioritise icu beds.
"the health ministry has warned of possible scenarios in which doctors would have to make the difficult choice to prioritise icu beds for patients with a high recovery potential over patients with low recovery potential (poor prognosis).
"this is a difficult situation that we are all facing and the health ministry would like to call on all parties to work together," he said in a joint press conference with senior minister (security) datuk seri ismail sabri yaakob.
dr noor hisham said the numbers of available beds in icus, covid-19 hospitals, as well as quarantine and treatment centres, were declining because of rapidly rising cases.
the usage of icu beds for covid-19 patients was now at 104 per cent capacity, with 1,113 beds in use, while covid-19 hospital beds have reached 85 per cent capacity, with 10,190 patients currently hospitalised.
as for covid-19 quarantine and treatment centres, beds were now at 65 per cent capacity, with 27,183 beds in use while ventilators were at 60 per cent, with 2,138 total being used, of which 39 per cent were for covid-19 patients.
he added that the health ministry has taken the initiative to increase the number of beds in covid-19 hospitals and covid-19 hybrid hospitals by repurposing certain spaces in the hospitals into icu units.
"the kepala batas hospital field icu, as well as the proposed temporary takeover of the ukm children's hospital, are also among the steps we are taking to increase icu capacity.
"we are also collaborating with ngos that are offering medical assistance to open more icus in areas that need them," he said, adding that the lack of manpower is posing a major challenge to the ministry.
dr noor hisham also said the health ministry has increased the quarantine period for travellers arriving from overseas.
the quarantine period for five high-risk countries such as india, pakistan, sri lanka, nepal and bangladesh has been extended to 21 days.
he also said malaysia might be able to flatten the covid-19 curve in three to four months, but this will require cooperation from the public to adhere to the standard operating procedures.
an accelerated vaccination drive would also be vital to slow the infection curve.
he said with the rise of new variants of concern (voc), the two-week total lockdown starting tuesday was necessary to reduce the number of cases and give front-liners much needed breathing room.
adding to concerns, he said the health ministry had recently received information from vietnam about a new voc detected there, a hybrid of the variants first identified in britain and india.
"the new variants are concerning as they cause more infections and deaths.
"we must ramp up vaccinations and in june, we will be able to use over 10 million doses, this is necessary for us to do.
"our behaviour is the first line of defence and if we can increase vaccination rates, that will increase our protection against the virus.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore a covid-19 patient who alleged that she could have been infected at changi airport after arriving from nepal on april 25 was unlikely to have caught the virus in singapore.
the ministry of health (moh) said on friday (may 28) that its investigations have confirmed there is no phylogenetic link between her case and those in the changi airport terminal 3 cluster.
phylogenetic testing helps to determine if infections are related.
moh was responding to queries from the straits times on claims made by ms sonal wadde, a 32-year-old indian national and dependant's pass holder, that she felt safer in india.
a screenshot circulated online shows she had written, in response to a question on facebook, that she was infected "most probably" at changi airport.
this was because two polymerase chain reaction (pcr) tests that she took before boarding the flight to singapore and upon arrival had been negative, she wrote in the comment, which was picked up by several online news websites.
it is unclear when she posted the comment, or what question she was responding to.
moh said: "a negative pre-departure test or on-arrival test does not necessarily mean that a person is free from covid-19, as one could be incubating the virus from an exposure prior to taking the tests. "
the changi airport cluster is currently the largest active cluster, with 108 cases linked to it as at thursday.
ms wadde is an imported case who was confirmed to have covid-19 infection on may 2, said moh.
she was detected when she tested positive during her stay-home notice at a dedicated facility.
after ms wadde was identified as a dbs bank employee in online articles on tuesday, the bank clarified in a facebook post that she was previously engaged as a contract employee through a third-party vendor from june to july 2019. ms wadde is not currently a dbs employee, said the post.
"we hold our employees to the highest standards of conduct, both in person and online.
dbs is fully committed to supporting the national effort to contain the spread of covid-19," said dbs.
checks by st found that ms wadde's linkedin and facebook profiles were no longer accessible.
this article was first published in the straits times.
permission required for reproduction.
reuters: hong kong senior executives of financial companies and their overseas affiliates who are fully vaccinated can now apply for an exemption from the three-week compulsory quarantine, the markets watchdog said.
a maximum of two senior executives per each financial company licensed by the city's securities and futures commission (sfc) and two of their overseas affiliates who need to travel in and out from hong kong for managing the company can apply for the exemption, according to the statement released late on friday (may 28).
to apply for the exemption, they need to provide a copy of their identity card or passport photo page, details of the trip and a covid-19 vaccination record and send it to sfc at least five days before the business trip.
sfc issues licences to companies such as asset managers, investment banks and securities brokerages.
successful applicants are only allowed to attend the activities listed in the details of the trip and are required to self isolate at the accommodation sponsored by the company.
those who breach the conditions will lose their exemption and will be sent to the compulsory quarantine centre for compulsory quarantine for 21 days.
once convicted, they will receive six months' imprisonment and a fine of hkus$5,000.
hong kong has one of the world's strictest covid-19 quarantine restrictions.
currently, crew members of aircraft and government officials are among those exempted from the compulsory quarantine.
the hong kong government and financial regulators have previously warned the slow take up of vaccinations in the city could undermine its status as a financial centre.
around 1,319,725 people have received their first vaccination dose, around 20.
1 per cent of the city's population.
the total number of confirmed covid-19 cases in hong kong is at 11,838, according to the centre for health protection.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
mount everest guide buddhi bahadur lama has spent days isolated in a tent after testing positive for coronavirus, as an outbreak that climbers say is putting lives at risk sweeps base camp.
he is one of four in his expedition team thought to have contracted covid-19 at the foot of the world's highest mountain, along with a growing number of others.
"this is not just our problem, it is happening in most of the teams at the base camp right now," the 35-year-old told afp.
dozens of suspected covid cases have been flown out of the area and at least two companies have cancelled expeditions after team members tested positive.
however authorities in nepal have yet to acknowledge a single case at the mountain, with the stakes high for the country's tourism industry after a covid shutdown last year cost millions in lost revenue.
lama's symptoms are mild but he said some climbers were suffering more severely.
the warmer weather that ushers in safer conditions for scaling everest and other himalayan peaks has coincided with a new wave of covid-19 infections in nepal.
the country is reporting an average of 8,000 cases a day and the health system has been overwhelmed.
over the last two months since the climbing season began, more than 1,000 mountaineers and their mainly nepali guides have been camped in the tent city.
more than 350 have reached the summit so far this season, but some are still at base camp waiting for the next weather window.
breathing is already difficult at high altitudes so the coronavirus becomes a major threat if symptoms appear during a climb.
officials at a camp clinic say more than 30 people have been flown out for health issues in recent weeks.
some have posted their covid-19 diagnosis on social media.
but the government says it is unaware of any cases.
"we have asked companies and officials to report to us if they have any covid cases but none has submitted anything yet.
we need an official report," said nepal's tourism department chief rudra singh tamang.
"if people have tested positive in kathmandu, it is hard to say where they got infected.
"there is also a lack of transparency among some expedition organisers about positive cases.
'lives at risk' -austrian expedition organiser lukas furtenbach, who was the first to cancel an expedition, said he had submitted a report to the government.
"there is an outbreak and there is evidence for that.
but the government is denying this outbreak and putting our lives and the lives of their own people, the sherpas, at risk," he said.
last week furtenbach was waiting to begin his ascent and his team of 19 climbers had already started acclimatisation treks when the virus struck.
one person in the group tested positive with a rapid test kit and the next day three sherpas also returned positive results.
eventually, eight in the expedition were found to have covid-19, with seven confirmed by a pcr test in kathmandu.
furtenbach believes they were infected on the mountain -- the only time his expedition was in close contact with other teams.
the company has also helped other climbing teams test for the virus and two people have shown positive results.
"if someone dies up there with covid the families would sue us -- when we knew about the outbreak and were still sending people up.
this is a liability," he said.
nepal suffered a devastating blow to its tourism industry last year when the pandemic forced a complete shutdown of its mountaineering sector.
without foreign climbers, the sherpas and other guides -- who are often the sole breadwinners for their families -- lost their main source of income.
kunga sherpa was evacuated from base camp after he tested positive and is now recovering in kathmandu.
"if we think financially, many need this year's earnings, but lives are important and perhaps, in a way, it would have been good to not climb this season," he said.
pm/tw/axna 95-year-old singaporean woman died on sunday (30 may) from covid-19 infection, the ministry of health said on the same day.
sri lankan authorities sunday said they will sue the owners of a singapore-registered cargo carrier which has burned for 11 straight days off the island's west coast and caused some of its worst-ever marine pollution.
$6,600「」,$100「」british prime minister boris johnson married his fiancee carrie symonds in a "secret ceremony" on saturday, uk media reports said.
gavin macleod, a veteran supporting actor best known for his role as an ever-smiling cruise ship captain on the 1970s-80s sitcom "the love boat," died saturday at the age of 90. ukraine's ambassador to thailand died early sunday on the southern beach island of koh lipe while on vacation with his son, police said, with the cause of death still undetermined.
smart,5%!$1,600,!us president joe biden's administration announced friday it will not return to the open skies treaty, which donald trump withdrew from, signaling a toughening stance against russia.
the ministry of health (moh) on saturday (29 may) confirmed 33 new covid-19 cases in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,003. the ministry of health (moh) on sunday (30 may) confirmed the detection of 25 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,028.
《!》ut,!israeli and egyptian officials held talks in both countries sunday aimed at bolstering the cairo-brokered ceasefire that ended the latest deadly flare-up of violence between the jewish state and gaza's hamas rulers.
the minimum occupation period is the period of time that you are required to physically occupy your flat before you can sell it on the open market.
the post minimum occupation period exemptions given to 4,500 households in last 3 years appeared first on icompareloan.
vietnam has discovered a new covid-19 variant which spreads quickly by air and is a combination of the indian and british strains, health officials confirmed saturday.
all asset classes.
industry-leading prices.
user-friendly investing online.
the theory that covid-19 might be the result of scientific experiments has thrown a spotlight on the work of the world's most secure biolabs.
prime minister lee hsien loong will deliver a live speech on monday (31 may) regarding singapore's approach to reopening while also controlling the spread of covid-19 within its borders.
jessica liu, president of lazada group, is leaving the southeast asian online shopping unit of alibaba group holding ltd. $120$12,000,9,sc mobile!more than 20 horses have died of starvation in just one month at bangladesh's most popular resort district, the animals' owners said sunday, as the country's tourism industry reels from the pandemic's economic fallout.
residents of a small french town laid cards and flowers saturday at the spot where a "very kind" and "gentle" policewoman was seriously wounded in a knife attack the day before, the latest in a spate of attacks on officers.
six hundred russian soldiers requested by the central african republic this month are "unarmed instructors," moscow's deputy ambassador to the united nations said friday.
,.
!the us customs agency announced friday it would block imports of products from china's dalian ocean fishing co for alleged use of forced labor and abuse of workers on its tuna vessels.
russian president vladimir putin took belarus strongman alexander lukashenko for a boat trip on saturday as the close allies met for a second day and held "informal talks" amid the outcry after minsk diverted a european plane.
"yesterday was the day of official talks and today it's informal," kremlin spokesman dmitri peskov told reporters of the meetings in sotchi on the black sea.
libya's military strongman khalifa haftar is polishing his political image ahead of elections, after a crippling rout on the battlefield and with his support waning at home and abroad, analysts say.
washington scientists are revisiting a central mystery of covid-19: where, when and how did the virus that causes the disease originate?the two prevailing competing theories are that the virus jumped from animals, possibly originating with bats, to humans, or that it escaped from a virology laboratory in wuhan, china.
the following is what is known about the virus' origins.
the wuhan institute of virology (wiv) is a high-security research facility that studies pathogens in nature with the potential to infect humans with deadly and exotic new diseases.
the lab has done extensive work on bat-borne viruses since the 2002 sars-cov-1 international outbreak, which began in china, killing 774 people worldwide.
the search for its origins led years later to discovery of sars-like viruses in a southwest china bat cave.
the institute collects genetic material from wildlife for experimentation at its wuhan lab.
researchers experiment with live viruses in animals to gauge human susceptibility.
to reduce the risk of pathogens escaping accidentally, the facility is supposed to enforce rigorous safety protocols, such as protective garb and super air filtration.
but even the strictest measures cannot eliminate such risks.
to some scientists, the release of a dangerous pathogen via a careless lab worker is a plausible hypothesis for how the pandemic started and warrants investigation.
the wuhan lab, china's leading sars research facility, is not far from the huanan seafood market, which early in the health crisis was cited as the most likely place where animal-to-human transmission of the virus may have taken place.
the market was also the site of the first known covid-19 superspreader event.
their proximity raised immediate suspicions, fuelled by the failure so far to identify any wildlife infected with the same viral lineage and compounded by the chinese government's refusal to allow the lab-leak scenario to be fully investigated.
[[nid:530586]]scientists and others have developed hypotheses based on general concerns about the risks involved in live virus lab research, clues in the virus' genome, and information from studies by institute researchers.
although the wuhan lab's scientists have said they had no trace of sars-cov-2 in their inventory at the time, 24 researchers sent a letter to the world health organisation (who) urging a rigorous, independent investigation.
the who's first such mission to china this year failed to probe deeply enough, they wrote.
a us state department fact sheet, released before the who mission in the waning days of the trump administration, alleged, without proof, that several wiv researchers had fallen sick with symptoms consistent with covid-19 or common seasonal illnesses before the first publicly confirmed case in december 2019. a may 5, story by nicholas wade in the bulletin of the atomic scientists, said lab scientists experimenting on a virus sometimes insert a sequence called a "furin cleavage site" into its genome in a manner that makes the virus more infective.
[[nid:523873]]david baltimore, a nobel prize-winning virologist quoted in the article, said when he spotted the sequence in the sars-cov-2 genome, he felt he had found the smoking gun for the origin of the virus.
what are the arguments for animal-to-human transmission?many scientists believe a natural origin is more likely and have seen no scientific evidence to support the lab leak theory.
dr kristian g.  andersen, a scientist at scripps research who has done extensive work on coronaviruses, ebola and other pathogens transmissible from animals to humans, said similar genomic sequences occur naturally in coronaviruses and are unlikely to be manipulated in the way baltimore described for experimentation.
scientists who favour the natural origins hypothesis have relied largely on history.
some of the most lethal new diseases of the past century have been traced to human interactions with wildlife and domestic animals, including the first sars epidemic (bats), mers-cov (camels), ebola (bats or non-human primates) and nipah virus (bats).
while an animal source has not been identified so far, swabs of stalls in the wildlife section of the wildlife market in wuhan after the outbreak tested positive, suggesting an infected animal or human handler.
has new information emerged to lend credence to one theory over another?the scientists' march 4 letter to the who refocused attention on the lab-leak scenario, but offered no new evidence.
nor has definitive proof of a natural origin surfaced.
us president joe biden on may 26 said his national security staff does not believe there is sufficient information to assess one theory to be more likely than the other.
he instructed intelligence officials to collect and analyse information that could close in on definitive conclusion and report back in 90 days.

                    saturday, 29 may 2021
                singapore, may 29 (dpa): singapore's pandemic-related restrictions are "working" and have helped to stall a slight rise in case numbers since last month, the city-state's finance minister, lawrence wong, said on friday (may 28).
saying case numbers had "even declined slightly" since the rules were brought in two weeks ago, wong ruled out any "further tightening of posture" ahead of the june 13 end-date for the measures, which include limiting restaurants to takeaway or delivery, and capping attendance at events at 100 people.
wong's ministry on friday announced an additional 800 million dollars in state funding for businesses affected by the retightening of curbs, adding gyms and arts education centres to the list of businesses receiving a 50-per-cent wage subsidy.
the restrictions were imposed after singapore's health ministry reported a rise in "unlinked" virus cases and after travel from hard-hit india and neighbouring countries was banned, including for work permit and residency holders.
singapore had up to then largely reopened domestically, after a short april-june lockdown last year.
the health ministry reported 30 new cases of the virus on friday, taking the total closer to 62,000.  most of the cases reported since the pandemic's start came in mid-2020 and were among migrant workers.
thirty-two deaths related to the virus have been recorded by the ministry.
dpa
tags / keywords:
singapore
                                                                ,
                                                                                                no more
                                                                ,
                                                                                                tightening
                                                                ,
                                                                                                pandemic curbs
                                                                ,
                                                                                                current measures
                                                                ,
                                                                                                enough



report it to us.
thank you for your report!copyright © 1995-
            

 star media group berhad (10894d)best viewed on chrome browsers.
{{item['v1 header']}}
   {{item['v1 body']}}

  {{item['v2 header']}}

we would love to keep you posted on the latest promotion.
kindly fill the form belowwe hope you enjoy this feature!
sri lankan authorities sunday said they will sue the owners of a singapore-registered cargo carrier which has burned for 11 straight days off the island's west coast and caused some of its worst-ever marine pollution.
police said a criminal investigation was also launched into the blaze aboard the mv x-press pearl, which was carrying 25 tonnes of nitric acid and a huge amount of plastic raw materials.
the intense fire, still burning at the rear of the 186 metre (610 feet) vessel, has destroyed much of the cargo, some of which also fell into the indian ocean.
tonnes of microplastic granules have inundated the south asian nation's famed beaches, forcing a fishing ban and sparking fears of ecological devastation.
sri lanka's marine environment protection authority said it met with attorney general sanjaya rajaratnam on sunday to plan legal action against the owners of the vessel, its crew, as well as insurers.
"we have gone through the details and will be taking action against those responsible," mepa chairman dharshani lahandapura told reporters in colombo.
she said they were, however, yet to make an assessment of the environmental damage, but she believed it was the "worst marine pollution" sri lanka has ever suffered.
fire under control -sri lanka's navy chief, vice admiral nishantha ulugetenne, who was also at sunday's talks with the island's chief prosecutor, said the x-press pearl was still on fire, but the blaze was now under control.
"it will take a few more days to completely extinguish the fire," ulugetenne said, adding that his assessment was that there was no danger of the vessel breaking up.
but he ruled out towing it away from sri lankan waters until the fire was completely put out and experts examined the vessel for any structural weaknesses.
international salvage firm smit is leading efforts to douse the flames and is being assisted by sri lanka's navy and the indian coastguard.
the three-month-old ship was heading to colombo from gujarat, india.
it had previously visited qatar and dubai and was due to go to malaysia and singapore after calling at colombo.
the 25-member crew, who have already been evacuated from the ship, will be questioned on monday, police said.
authorities said last week they believed the fire was caused by a nitric acid leak that the crew had been aware of since may 11.
"the captain and the crew were in quarantine, but health authorities have told us that we can question them from tomorrow," ajith rohana, a police spokesperson, told afp.
"we have already sent samples of polluted seawater and burnt debris from the vessel for a forensic report.
"the ship's owners, x-press feeders, said the vessel's hull remained intact and there was no damage to its fuel tanks.
fishermen have been banned from the 80-kilometre (50-mile) stretch of coast, where tonnes of plastic pellets have washed up, sparking a massive clean-up effort.
fisheries minister kanchana wijesekera said the government would compensate them for their expected losses.
at least 4,500 fishermen were affected at the fishing and tourist resort of negombo, officials from the roman catholic church in the area said saturday as they pleaded for financial aid.
priest sujeewa athukorale told afp on saturday that there were also fears of reduced demand for seafood from the area over contamination fears.
aj/ohoa 95-year-old singaporean woman died on sunday (30 may) from covid-19 infection, the ministry of health said on the same day.
british prime minister boris johnson married his fiancee carrie symonds in a "secret ceremony" on saturday, uk media reports said.
smart,5%!$1,600,!gavin macleod, a veteran supporting actor best known for his role as an ever-smiling cruise ship captain on the 1970s-80s sitcom "the love boat," died saturday at the age of 90. ukraine's ambassador to thailand died early sunday on the southern beach island of koh lipe while on vacation with his son, police said, with the cause of death still undetermined.
us president joe biden's administration announced friday it will not return to the open skies treaty, which donald trump withdrew from, signaling a toughening stance against russia.
$6,600「」,$100「」sri lanka faces an unprecedented pollution crisis as waves of plastic waste from a burning container ship hit the coast and threaten to devastate the local environment, a top environment official warned saturday.
the ministry of health (moh) on saturday (29 may) confirmed 33 new covid-19 cases in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,003. the ministry of health (moh) on sunday (30 may) confirmed the detection of 25 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,028.
《!》ut,!israeli and egyptian officials held talks in both countries sunday aimed at bolstering the cairo-brokered ceasefire that ended the latest deadly flare-up of violence between the jewish state and gaza's hamas rulers.
the minimum occupation period is the period of time that you are required to physically occupy your flat before you can sell it on the open market.
the post minimum occupation period exemptions given to 4,500 households in last 3 years appeared first on icompareloan.
vietnam has discovered a new covid-19 variant which spreads quickly by air and is a combination of the indian and british strains, health officials confirmed saturday.
all asset classes.
industry-leading prices.
user-friendly investing online.
the theory that covid-19 might be the result of scientific experiments has thrown a spotlight on the work of the world's most secure biolabs.
prime minister lee hsien loong will deliver a live speech on monday (31 may) regarding singapore's approach to reopening while also controlling the spread of covid-19 within its borders.
jessica liu, president of lazada group, is leaving the southeast asian online shopping unit of alibaba group holding ltd. n1   09:00-13:00   91 | n2    10:00-14:00  716more than 20 horses have died of starvation in just one month at bangladesh's most popular resort district, the animals' owners said sunday, as the country's tourism industry reels from the pandemic's economic fallout.
residents of a small french town laid cards and flowers saturday at the spot where a "very kind" and "gentle" policewoman was seriously wounded in a knife attack the day before, the latest in a spate of attacks on officers.
six hundred russian soldiers requested by the central african republic this month are "unarmed instructors," moscow's deputy ambassador to the united nations said friday.
,《》《》,,!the us customs agency announced friday it would block imports of products from china's dalian ocean fishing co for alleged use of forced labor and abuse of workers on its tuna vessels.
russian president vladimir putin took belarus strongman alexander lukashenko for a boat trip on saturday as the close allies met for a second day and held "informal talks" amid the outcry after minsk diverted a european plane.
"yesterday was the day of official talks and today it's informal," kremlin spokesman dmitri peskov told reporters of the meetings in sotchi on the black sea.
libya's military strongman khalifa haftar is polishing his political image ahead of elections, after a crippling rout on the battlefield and with his support waning at home and abroad, analysts say.
the theory that covid-19 might be the result of scientific experiments has thrown a spotlight on the work of the world's most secure biolabs.
while the evidence linking sars-cov-2 to the wuhan institute of virology in china is strictly circumstantial, a number of experts want tougher controls on such facilities over fears that accidental leaks could touch off the next pandemic.
here's what you should know.
59 top facilities -the wuhan lab belongs to the most secure class, commonly referred to as biosafety level 4, or bsl4.
these are built to work safely and securely with the most dangerous bacteria and viruses that can cause serious diseases for which there are no known treatment or vaccines.
"there are hvac filtration systems, so that the virus can't escape through exhaust; any waste water that leaves the facility is treated with either chemicals or high temperatures to make sure that there's nothing alive," gregory koblentz, director of the biodefense graduate program at george mason university, told afp.
the researchers themselves are highly trained and wear hazmat suits.
there are 59 such facilities across the world, according to a report koblentz co-authored that was released this week.
"there are no binding international standards for safe, secure, and responsible work on pathogens," the report, called mapping maximum biological containment labs globally, said.
accidents do happen -accidents can happen, sometimes at the top tier facilities, and much more frequently at lower rung labs of which there are thousands.
human h1n1 virus -- the same flu that caused the 1918 pandemic -- leaked in 1977 in the soviet union and china and spread worldwide.
in 2001, a mentally disturbed employee at a us biolab mailed out anthrax spores across the country, killing five people.
two chinese researchers exposed to sars in 2004 spread the disease to others, killing one.
in 2014, a handful of smallpox vials were uncovered during an food and drug administration office move.
lynn klotz, a senior science fellow at the center for arms control and non-proliferation, has been sounding the alarm for many years about the public safety threats posed by such facilities.
"human errors constitute over 70 percent of the errors in laboratories," he told afp, adding that us researchers have to rely on data from freedom of information requests to learn of these incidents.
'gain of function' controversy -there is disagreement between the us government, which funded bat coronavirus research in wuhan, and some independent scientists, about whether this work was controversial "gain of function" (gof) research.
gof research entails modifying pathogens to make them more transmissible, deadlier, or better able to evade treatment and vaccines -- all to learn how to fight them better.
this field has long been contentious.
debate reached a fever pitch when two research teams in 2011 showed they could make bird flu transmissible between mammals.
harvard epidemiologist marc lipsitch told afp he was concerned "that it would create a strain of virus that if it infected a laboratory worker could not just kill that laboratory worker.
.
.
but also cause a pandemic.
""the research is not required and does not contribute to the development of drugs or vaccines," added molecular biologist richard ebright of rutgers university, one of the staunchest opponents of this kind of research.
in 2014 the us government announced a pause in federal funding for such work, which gave way in 2017 to a framework that would consider each application on a case-by-case basis.
but the process has been criticized as lacking transparency and credibility.
as late as last year, a nonprofit received funding from the us on research to "predict spillover potential" of bat coronavirus to humans in wuhan.
questioned by congress this week, francis collins and anthony fauci of the national institutes of health denied this amounted to gain of function research, but ebright said it clearly does.
the path ahead -none of this means that covid-19 definitely leaked from a lab -- in fact there is no hard scientific evidence in favor of natural origin or lab accident scenario, said ebright.
but there are certain lines of circumstantial evidence in favor of the latter.
for instance, wuhan is around 1,000 miles north of bat caves that harbor the ancestor virus, well out of the animals' flight range.
scientists from wuhan were however known to be carrying out routine trips to those caves to take samples.
alina chan, a molecular biologist from the broad institute, said there were no signs of risky pathogen research dying down in the wake of the pandemic -- in fact "it's possibly expanded.
"last year, chan published research showing that, unlike sars, sars-cov-2 was not evolving fast when it was first detected in humans -- another piece of circumstantial evidence that could point to lab origin.
chan considers herself a "fence-sitter" on the competing hypotheses, but does not favor banning risky research, fearing it would then go underground.
one solution "might just be as simple as moving these research institutes out into extremely remote areas.
.
.
where you have to quarantine for two weeks before we re-enter in human society," she said.
ia-la-pmh/dwa 95-year-old singaporean woman died on sunday (30 may) from covid-19 infection, the ministry of health said on the same day.
sri lankan authorities sunday said they will sue the owners of a singapore-registered cargo carrier which has burned for 11 straight days off the island's west coast and caused some of its worst-ever marine pollution.
《!》ut,!british prime minister boris johnson married his fiancee carrie symonds in a "secret ceremony" on saturday, uk media reports said.
gavin macleod, a veteran supporting actor best known for his role as an ever-smiling cruise ship captain on the 1970s-80s sitcom "the love boat," died saturday at the age of 90. ukraine's ambassador to thailand died early sunday on the southern beach island of koh lipe while on vacation with his son, police said, with the cause of death still undetermined.
$6,600「」,$100「」us president joe biden's administration announced friday it will not return to the open skies treaty, which donald trump withdrew from, signaling a toughening stance against russia.
the ministry of health (moh) on saturday (29 may) confirmed 33 new covid-19 cases in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,003. the ministry of health (moh) on sunday (30 may) confirmed the detection of 25 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,028. all asset classes.
industry-leading prices.
user-friendly investing online.
israeli and egyptian officials held talks in both countries sunday aimed at bolstering the cairo-brokered ceasefire that ended the latest deadly flare-up of violence between the jewish state and gaza's hamas rulers.
the minimum occupation period is the period of time that you are required to physically occupy your flat before you can sell it on the open market.
the post minimum occupation period exemptions given to 4,500 households in last 3 years appeared first on icompareloan.
vietnam has discovered a new covid-19 variant which spreads quickly by air and is a combination of the indian and british strains, health officials confirmed saturday.
,.
!jessica liu, president of lazada group, is leaving the southeast asian online shopping unit of alibaba group holding ltd. prime minister lee hsien loong will deliver a live speech on monday (31 may) regarding singapore's approach to reopening while also controlling the spread of covid-19 within its borders.
more than 20 horses have died of starvation in just one month at bangladesh's most popular resort district, the animals' owners said sunday, as the country's tourism industry reels from the pandemic's economic fallout.
,《》《》,,!residents of a small french town laid cards and flowers saturday at the spot where a "very kind" and "gentle" policewoman was seriously wounded in a knife attack the day before, the latest in a spate of attacks on officers.
six hundred russian soldiers requested by the central african republic this month are "unarmed instructors," moscow's deputy ambassador to the united nations said friday.
the us customs agency announced friday it would block imports of products from china's dalian ocean fishing co for alleged use of forced labor and abuse of workers on its tuna vessels.
yahoo,,,『,』,!russian president vladimir putin took belarus strongman alexander lukashenko for a boat trip on saturday as the close allies met for a second day and held "informal talks" amid the outcry after minsk diverted a european plane.
"yesterday was the day of official talks and today it's informal," kremlin spokesman dmitri peskov told reporters of the meetings in sotchi on the black sea.
libya's military strongman khalifa haftar is polishing his political image ahead of elections, after a crippling rout on the battlefield and with his support waning at home and abroad, analysts say.
canadian health authorities announced saturday they were pushing back the expiration date on nearly 50,000 doses of astrazeneca coronavirus vaccine by one month.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore the republic will continue to work closely with malaysia to ensure the continued flow of goods and supplies between the two countries, despite the latter's announcement of further tightened measures to control the pandemic, minister for trade and industry gan kim yong said on saturday (may 29).
malaysia had announced on friday that it will be implementing a nationwide total lockdown for all social and economic sectors from next tuesday to june 14 to curb the spread of covid-19 within the country.
mr gan said leading supermarket chains in singapore have been actively monitoring the situation globally and regionally since last year.
"where necessary, they have acted quickly to build up inventory to increase our stock of food and essential supplies.
"the ministry of trade and industry said in a facebook post on saturday that mr gan made these comments during a visit to ntuc fairprice's benoi distribution centre and a cold warehouse at ych's supply chain city.
mr gan also expressed appreciation to logistics professionals and supermarket staff for their hard work "in ensuring that there are sufficient supplies for the nation".
"as we continue the battle against the pandemic, i urge all singaporeans to continue to stand together while taking care of the most vulnerable among us," he added.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore a woman admitted on friday (may 28) to slapping the face of a then eight-year-old girl in an mrt train.
she wanted to stop the girl from leaving the train without apologising for having stepped on her foot.
but the girl had apologised to connie soh, 45, who was talking loudly on her phone at the time and did not hear the apology.
on friday, soh pleaded guilty to one charge of voluntarily causing hurt.
she faces enhanced penalties as the victim is under 14 years old.
the court heard that on july 15 last year, some time before 1.
47pm, the victim accidentally stepped on soh's left foot after boarding the mrt train with her mother at choa chu kang station.
she apologised to soh, who was talking loudly on her phone at the time and did not hear the apology.
soh confronted the victim's mother and asked her why the girl did not apologise for stepping on her foot.
but the mother told soh that her daughter had apologised, and an argument ensued.
[[nid:530102]]when the train reached yew tee station and the girl and her mother proceeded to exit the train carriage, soh slapped the girl on her left cheek to try to prevent her from leaving without apologising.
the girl started to cry, and her mother called the police from the station soon after.
later that day, the mother took her daughter to national university hospital, where a doctor noted that the girl had sustained a left cheek contusion, or bruise.
she was given a two-day medical certificate, with excuse from physical activity until july 19 that year.
deputy public prosecutor joseph gwee urged the court to sentence soh to a fine of at least $5,000, calling soh's response "(an) objectively disproportionate one (that was) committed in a public place".
soh is scheduled for sentencing on june 18.  one other charge of using criminal force to poke the nose of the girl's mother will be taken into account during sentencing.
for voluntarily causing hurt, an offender can be jailed for up to three years, fined up to $5,000, or both.
soh faces double this maximum penalty as the girl was under 14. this article was first published in the straits times.
permission required for reproduction.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore a new requirement that singapore citizens and permanent residents (prs) must test negative for covid-19 before being allowed to return home from high-risk countries kicked in at midnight on sunday (may 30).
infectious diseases experts say the move will help to protect front-line staff at the airport and could help to ease the load on singapore's healthcare system, which has had to deal with a spike in community cases in recent weeks.
but they also note the measure has its limitations and implementing it is not as straightforward as it seems.
at least one legal expert has raised the issue of the constitutionality of the new requirement with the government.
the ministry of health (moh) said last wednesday that, from 11.
59pm on saturday, all singaporeans and prs returning to the country will have to present a valid negative covid-19 polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test taken within 72 hours before their departure.
this is the first time moh has required singaporeans and prs to take a pre-departure test.
the ministry had previously said it did not want to make it difficult for them to return home, should they be caught unprepared by rapidly deteriorating pandemic conditions abroad.
the immigration and checkpoints authority's (ica) safetravel website says those travelling by plane or by boat will have to present their test result at the air and sea checkpoints upon arrival in singapore.
those who have stayed in lower-risk areas, including australia, brunei, china, hong kong, macau and new zealand, for the last 21 days are exempted.
children aged six and below are also exempted from the new requirement.
at land checkpoints, only prs entering singapore will need to present a valid, negative test result.
prs who arrive in singapore overland without a valid, negative test result may be denied entry.
those who fail to comply with the new requirement may have their entry or re-entry permit cancelled.
travellers must be tested by an accredited or authorised health centre in the country or region of departure.
documentary proof is required and ica recommends that travellers ask for a copy of the pcr test report that is in english or accompanied by an english translation, contains the traveller's name, date of birth and passport number, and shows the date and result of the test.
mr fin chua, 30, who has been living in thailand for eight years, planned to fly back to singapore next week to visit his father who lives alone.
after hearing about the pre-departure test requirement, the business owner considered moving his flight earlier so he could return before the measure kicked in.
ultimately, mr chua did not do so.
instead, he moved his flight back by two weeks to mid-june, citing the lengthy 21-day stay-home notice he would have to serve if he came back home now.
mr chua feels that the new requirement is onerous as it is not easy getting a covid-19 pcr test in bangkok .
he said a pcr test in the thai capital costs about 2,000 baht (s$85) at a government clinic and 4,000 baht at a government hospital, but it is hard for foreigners to get tested as thais get priority.
the wait to get tested at the clinics can take hours, he said, unless one pays more to join a priority queue which means a wait time of 15 to 30 minutes.
a pcr test in bangkok costs about 2,000 baht (s$85) at a government clinic and 4,000 baht at a government hospital, but it is hard for foreigners to get tested as thais get priority.
photo: epa-efe
ms cheryl wong, 30, who works in the film industry in new york, said she did not mind the new requirement as getting tested for covid-19 in the us city is easy and there are free services.
"if i lived somewhere else with less testing options and undetermined turnaround times, i'd probably be more annoyed," added ms wong, who is returning home on may 31 to renew her us work visa and to see her family after being away for 11⁄2 years.
she noted, though, that the new test requirement did not appear to take into account singaporeans or prs who had already been vaccinated, or that individuals may still test positive even though they may no longer be infectious.
she said: "i'm pretty sure i'll test negative because i'm fully vaccinated and i am still cautious.
but there is that little bit of a what if.
"mr samuel phua, 23, who is coming home next month after graduating from the sibelius academy in finland, is also somewhat anxious about the pre-departure test.
"it is allergy season here, and pollen allergies and covid-19 have symptoms that are quite similar.
i got myself tested recently and my results were negative, but there's always that sliver of doubt and worry that the next one may be positive.
"but mr phua also said that the new requirement is an important step towards ensuring the safety of singaporeans both abroad and back home.
dr ling li min, an infectious disease physician from rophi clinic, said the decision to require citizens and prs to take pre-departure tests before they are allowed entry would have been a difficult one for the authorities to make.
limited access to swab testing facilities in some countries means that singaporeans living in places where covid-19 is raging may not be able to return home.
but with the recent spate of unlinked community cases, dr ling said, the authorities now have several fires to fight and the new testing requirement will help to minimise the risk of the virus spreading in singapore.
this is especially in the light of the fact that the changi airport cluster singapore's largest active cluster with more than 100 cases was traced to staff interactions with a family who flew in from south asia.
while dr ling acknowledged that pcr tests may not pick up every single case, she said the mandatory pre-departure tests will at least help to identify those who are infectious and prevent the virus from spreading onboard flights into singapore.
she added: "it is evident that a key vulnerability exists from when passengers disembark until they are taken to their stay-home notice facility.
this measure would further reduce the potential exposure to the virus for that part of the journey.
"professor paul tambyah, deputy director of the national university of singapore (nus) yong loo lin school of medicine's infectious diseases translational research programme, also said the new measure would protect changi airport staff.
"if this screening reduces the number of infected people passing through the airport even by a small proportion, it might reduce the risk to staff in particular to those who, for some reason or another, cannot take the vaccines," he said.
asked if the authorities should also extend the pre-departure test requirement to singaporeans and prs returning from lower-risk places, prof tambyah said it would be logical to mandate the test for everyone.
"taiwan and vietnam were previously considered low-risk places, as was the state of victoria in australia.
these classifications can change rapidly," he added.
the new measure would protect changi airport staff, says professor paul tambyah.
st photo: mark cheong
professor teo yik ying, dean of nus' saw swee hock school of public health, said implementing the new requirement may be more challenging than anticipated.
echoing a point made by prof tambyah, prof teo said not every jurisdiction will have commercial pcr testing capacity that is accredited and trustworthy.
hence, there is a need to ensure that singaporeans and prs who intend to travel to singapore are able to access proper testing.
otherwise, the testing requirement could be additional logistical hurdles for those returning as they would have to transit in cities where these tests are available, prof teo said.
he added: "it will not be useful if returning travellers simply pay for a substandard test or a forged negative pcr test certificate.
"there is also the issue of the government's responsibility towards citizens who test positive and cannot return home on a commercial flight.
moh said travellers who test positive on their pre-departure test should seek medical care and ensure that they have fully recovered and are non-infectious before travelling to singapore.
singaporeans who test positive for covid-19 while overseas and require urgent medical care can still return home via a medevac flight or any other equivalent form of conveyance.
singapore management university assistant professor of law benjamin joshua ong noted that article 13(1) of the singapore constitution states that no citizen of singapore shall be "banished or excluded" from singapore.
the courts have not ruled on the precise meaning of the words "banished" or "excluded", he said.
"it is possible that those words mean that anything preventing a citizen of singapore from travelling to singapore would be unconstitutional.
on the other hand, a court might also hold that it is acceptable for certain requirements to be imposed on citizens before they can return.
.
.
"i think it is at least arguable that, if the restrictions are too onerous, then those restrictions would in substance amount to banishment or exclusion," he added.
prof ong said he has written to moh for more information about the precise legal basis for the new pre-departure test requirement.
he also suggested that exceptions be allowed, citing a hypothetical case of a singaporean abroad whose overseas visa or work permit may be expiring but cannot get access to a covid-19 test in time to return home, putting him at risk of overstaying.
however, smu law don eugene tan said that while at first glance it might appear that the pre-departure test requirement for singaporeans is in breach of article 13(1), this is not the case.
"while article 13(1) is not explicitly subjected to any derogations or restrictions, a citizen who is not in singapore voluntarily cannot be said to be banished or excluded," associate professor tan said.
instead, the testing requirement only means that a citizen will not be allowed to board a flight or ferry to singapore unless he has a negative covid-19 test result.
if the citizen does somehow make the journey to singapore, he will unlikely be denied entry, prof tan added.
"in other words, the pre-departure test requirement imposes a duty on the flight or ferry operator to ensure that all passengers travelling to singapore have the necessary negative test results based on their travel histories.
the constitutional guarantee provided by article 13(1) is in no way under threat. "
travellers should ensure that they have fully recovered and are non-infectious before travelling to singapore.
st photo: mark cheong
prof tambyah said there seems to be a reluctance to ban flights and replace them with evacuation flights like what was done with wuhan at the start of the pandemic.
hence, the new measure is a logical option despite its limitations.
prof teo said he believes that the singapore government will not leave any citizen in the lurch during a medical emergency, but stressed that individuals also need to bear responsibility should they choose to travel out of singapore while the pandemic is still raging globally.
he added: "this is really a reminder to singaporeans and prs that they should avoid unnecessary travel out of singapore during this period, and if they choose to do so, to ensure they have the necessary insurance coverage for covid-19 medical evacuation if infected.
"join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore a father figure who was a pillar of support for athletes, veteran sports administrator edwin lee will be remembered for his commitment and generosity to the local fraternity.
lee, who was singapore national olympic council (snoc) treasurer, singapore olympic foundation director, singapore taekwondo federation (stf) and chinese swimming club (csc) president, died on saturday (may 29) morning.
he was 65 and is the second member of the snoc's executive committee to pass away in the last two months.
vice-president milan kwee the man lee succeeded as president of the stf died in march at the age of 74. swimmer joseph schooling said he was "heartbroken", as he paid tribute to the man he affectionately called "uncle edwin".
the olympic 100m butterfly champion said: "he was a generous man who never shied away from giving back to the community.
my condolences to his family and i hope they will take comfort in knowing that we are ever grateful to uncle edwin for his contributions and that many more will continue to benefit from his big heart for a long time to come.
"former national swimmer gary tan was just as saddened by the news as he recalled the time he was a 12-year-old csc swimmer and a beneficiary of lee's kindness more than two decades ago.
now the national training centre head coach, he told the straits times: "csc had organised a training camp in the united states for over 50 swimmers, and edwin dipped into his own pocket to help fund the trip for around half of the group who needed the assistance, so that we could all improve from the programme.
"and even later on, when i became a national swimmer and was studying and training in america, we would still keep in close contact as he checked on how i was doing.
"this is the measure of the man who has helped so many athletes on a personal level and given much of his time to help different local sports.
"while lee was never a national athlete he used to play rugby when he was studying in australia he nonetheless left an indelible mark on singapore sport.
he was involved with the singapore table tennis association for over 20 years and while there, he started the sport's foreign talent scheme along with then-deputy president terry tan.
this eventually led to singapore earning a silver medal at the 2008 beijing olympics the nation's first at the games since weightlifter tan howe liang's silver medal in 1960 and two bronze medals at london 2012.  in between, a historic world team championship was secured in 2010. the director of property development company lee kim tah holdings was also singapore tennis association president from 2000 to 2015. minister for culture, community and youth edwin tong said in a facebook post that he was "shocked to learn of the wholly unexpected passing" of lee and that he and his ministry joined the snoc in mourning lee's passing.
he hailed lee as "a passionate, dedicated stalwart" of the local fraternity and said his "exuberance towards singapore sport was infectious and heartwarming".
"the sporting community has lost a passionate champion and respected leader.
we will miss him greatly.
our deepest condolences to edwin's family," he added.
snoc president tan chuan-jin remembered lee as "no-nonsense and straight-talking", but also someone with "a great sense of humour and a heart of gold".
he said: "edwin was an invaluable part of our team at snoc.
not only was he our treasurer, he was also our trusted resource person to help sort out awkward and difficult issues.
he was involved with sports for quite some time and contributed richly.
"he was kind and generous with those around him and cared deeply for our athletes and for sports in singapore.
we will miss him dearly.
"one such difficult issue was the leadership of the stf, which saw the mass resignation of seven committee members, including then-president kwee, in 2018.  on top of that, the federation was suspended by both the snoc and world taekwondo, the sport's global governing body.
it has yet to be reinstated.
it was also embroiled in legal issues with its former secretary-general wong liang ming.
lee volunteered to work to restore the standing of the beleaguered federation and was subsequently elected last year.
international olympic committee vice-president and snoc executive committee member ng ser miang mourned the loss of "an extremely dear friend who is like a brother".
having known lee in the 1980s when the duo helped to reshape the automobile association of singapore, ng said: "no words can express the sadness and pain of the loss.
edwin was a great sports leader.
.
.
and also a generous man who contributed to many worthy causes and helped many in need.
"he worked very hard to support athletes and clubs.
he was on the board of the marina bay golf course and was instrumental in laying the foundation of the very first public golf course that has won many asian golf accolades.
"edwin's departure is a great loss to sports, to society and to all of us.
"lee leaves behind two children, mark and nicole.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore a video clip of an eagle ray being reeled in at east coast park has been shared widely on social media since last friday (may 28).
the three-minute clip starts with an angler doggedly pulling and tugging at his fishing rod as more than 10 bystanders watch.
about two minutes into the clip, three individuals help to pull the fishing line and the eagle ray appears to the exclamation of onlookers.
the ray is then dragged to shore as it thrashes its fins.
the clip was uploaded by facebook user raymond khoo last friday.
as at sunday, it had been shared by about 2,600 netizens.
when contacted, mr khoo said the clip was forwarded to him by a friend, and he did not know what happened to the ray.
he confirmed that the incident took place near bedok jetty.
marine stewards singapore, a conservation group, said it occurred at may 3 at 4.
45pm.
the straits times received another whatsapp video which showed the ray's head being impaled with a large hook so that it could be dragged onto the beach.
st also received a photo which showed two individuals dragging the dead ray along the jetty.
st received a photo which showed two individuals dragging the dead ray along the jetty.
photo: st reader
dr karenne tun, director of the national parks board's (nparks) national biodiversity centre, identified the eagle ray species as the white-spotted eagle ray, or aetobatus ocellatus.
national university of singapore (nus) marine biologist huang danwei said three species of eagle rays have been recorded in singapore, of which the white-spotted eagle ray is the most frequently detected.
it is classified as a vulnerable species on the international union for conservation of nature's red list of threatened species.
this means that the animal is at risk of extinction, said assistant professor huang, who is from nus' department of biological sciences.
this is not the first time that a ray was caught by anglers in singapore.
in july last year, a huge 80kg honeycomb whipray was caught at bedok jetty, after a three-hour tussle with an angler.
video clips of the gigantic ray being sliced up were also shared online.
mr kelvin lim, curator of vertebrate collections at the lee kong chian natural history museum in nus, said leisure fishermen are usually unable to tell if they have caught an endangered fish, but if they do reel in one, they should release it if the animal is alive and not too seriously injured.
"the animals do get injured when they are hooked, usually at the mouth.
i do not know what the chances of survival are, but practitioners of catch and release believe that they are able to heal quickly," he said.
however, if a large fish is impaled by a big hook, that is likely to cause more grievous injuries, he added.
mr lim said the eagle ray would have been in distress the moment it was hooked, and its distress would have multiplied when it was pulled out of the water.
prof huang said: "we ought to avoid interacting or getting too close to threatened species.
rather, admire from a distance where possible to minimise further harm to them, and to prevent injuries to ourselves.
"dr tun said voluntary catch-and-release fishing – in which fish that are caught are released if not to be eaten – is one of the best practices for recreational fishing.
"this is especially for juveniles, and endangered and threatened species," she added.
dr tun added that nparks and marine stewards singapore jointly developed an information board at bedok jetty to showcase the common fish species caught there, and to promote sustainable fishing practices.
the white-spotted eagle ray is included on the information board's catch-and-release list.
"responsible fishing practices will help us maintain our rich biodiversity and will allow the population to continue to thrive," she added.
mr lim noted that the people in the video clip who pulled in the ray seemed to know what they were doing to keep themselves safe and away from its stinging barbs.
"seasoned fishermen know to avoid the thrashing tail where the stinging barbs are.
members of the public should not go near a live stingray in distress and thrashing about because they may get stung by it," he said.
prof huang said stingrays can have venomous barbed spines on their tails that can inflict very painful stings.
in march, two beachgoers were stung by stingrays at sentosa beaches.
prof huang added that the white-spotted eagle ray is widespread throughout the tropics in the indo-pacific region, and has been seen in singapore along the southern coast and southern islands.
"stingrays, including the spotted eagle ray, occasionally swim close to our shore and make for very amazing sightings.
"mr lim said the species can grow up to 3m wide and some of its notable features include its protruding head and numerous white spots.
unlike many stingrays that stick to the bottom of the sea, the eagle ray swims about, flapping its fins.
he added that in south-east asia, the ray is caught for food and is also a popular display animal in large aquariums.
late last year, a school of five eagle rays were spotted flitting along labrador park.
eagle rays off singapore shores are labrador park!
the first time i saw eagle rays was in indonesia so this is a real treat!
one of the benefits of keeping our shores alive, more than rock and water, but thriving with lots of snacks and yummy stuff for marine creatures!🦈🐬🐟🐠🦑 pic.
twitter.
com/13duazrdwtprof huang noted that there have been more reported encounters of stingrays, jellyfish and other marine wildlife over the last two years.
lethal box jellyfish have been seen gliding through sentosa waters and east coast park, among other places, since last year.
prof huang said some reasons for more sightings include slight increases in the abundance of marine species due to natural population processes, and more people visiting coastal areas.
"overall, there is no convincing evidence yet to suggest any sustained trends in marine biodiversity in singapore.
"join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore: the national parks board (nparks) said on sunday (may 30) that members of the public are encouraged to fish in a responsible manner and to use more sustainablepracticessuch as the catch-and-release.
"this is especially for juveniles, endangered and threatened species," director of nparks' national biodiversity centre dr karenne tun said in response to queries from cna.
dr tun's statement follows the emergence of a widely shared video on facebook of an angler in singapore reeling in what appears to be a white-spotted eagle ray at east coast park.
the ray, which can grow up to 3m wide, is classified as vulnerable under the international union for conservation of nature red list of threatened species.
nparks did not comment on the video or clarify where or when the ray was caught, but said ittakes a balanced approach on recreational fishing and works withother agencies to educate the fishing community to fish only at designated sites.
designated fishing sites include changi beach park and changi boardwalk, east coast park, labrador nature reserve, pasir ris park, pulau ubin, sembawang park, west coast park and woodlands waterfront park.
nparks said that it has also worked with sustainable fishing group marine stewards singapore to develop an information board at bedok jetty.
the board showcases the common fish species caught there, "as well as to promote sustainable fishing practices, including catch-and-release.
the white-spotted eagle ray is included in the 'catch-and-release' list," said dr tun.
'no fishing' areasto protect singapore's marine life and the more than 100 species of fish that can be found in singapore's waters, certain 'no fishing' areas have been designated for fish to flourish and grow to maturity, nparks said.
these include areas such as the sisters' islands marine park, sungei buloh wetland reserve, labrador nature reserve's rocky shore, chek jawa wetlands, and the waters around coney island park.
offenders can be fined up to s$5,000 for fishing in 'no fishing' areas in nparks-managed parks, and up to s$50,000 for fishing in nature reserves.
nparks also works with other agencies to carry out joint enforcement operations in nature reserves and reservoirs to curb illegal fishing, it said.
sustainable fishingdr tun said nparks has also worked with fishing communities and engaged anglers through community initiatives to promote responsible fishing and "best practices for recreational fishing".
members of the public who fish recreationally should also consider more sustainable methods of fishing, dr tun said.
each method of fishing from the hook, rod and line to fish traps and nets, "has their own characteristics and varies in their impact on the environment", she explained.
"fish traps and nets tend to be more indiscriminate, and when lost in the sea, will continue to trap and kill fish and other marine life.
"nets that settle onto the seabed could also entangle corals or other bottom-dwelling organisms, and can smother them to death.
"for this reason, net fishing and the use of wire mesh traps are not allowed in areas managed by nparks," said dr tun.
nparks also encourages catch-and-release fishing, where fish that are not going to be eaten are released back into the sea.
"responsible fishing practices will help us maintain our rich biodiversity and will the population to continue to thrive," said dr tun.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore: a 31-year-old man was arrested on friday (may 28) after attempting to escape from police in his car, the singapore police force (spf) said on saturday.
the man was suspected to have been involved in a case of loanshark harassment at haig road on may 23, as well as a rash act and drug-related offences.
he was also wanted by police for theft and dangerous driving, and by the central narcotics bureau (cnb) for other drug-related offences.
police conducted an operation to apprehend the man at about 3.
40pm on friday around block 469 admiralty drive.
"when the man realised that he was being followed by unmarked police vehicles, he attempted to escape in his vehicle," spf said in a news release.
"in the process, the man allegedly hit and damaged one of the unmarked police (vehicles).
"no officers were injured, said the police.
spf immediately mounted an islandwide operation to locate the man, and found his getaway vehicle around block 222 yishun street 21. he was later arrested in a flat at block 772 woodlands drive 60. spf and cnb investigations are ongoing.
the man was charged for loanshark harassment on saturday.
"the police will not hesitate to take firm action against offenders who blatantly disregard the law and threaten the safety and security of our neighbourhoods," spf said.
first-time offenders convicted of loanshark harassment face mandatory imprisonment of up to five years, mandatory caning of up to six strokes and a fine of between s$5,000 and s$50,000.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore the people's association (pa) has apologised for using a wedding photograph of a malay/muslim couple as a standee for hari raya decorations at a housing board estate in tiong bahru, without permission.
the pa has removed the standee.
the photograph in which the couple is dressed in traditional malay garb with elements of wedding symbols was used to create a standee alongside a decorative platform and banner depicting mr melvin yong, mp for radin mas, and his hari raya wishes for residents.
in a number of instagram stories as well as a post on friday (may 28) that has garnered more than 10,000 likes, ms sarah bagharib, 30, said she had been alerted by two friends to the use of her wedding photograph.
she added that neither the photographer nor she and her husband had been approached to give consent for its use.
they tied the knot in 2017. ms sarah, who works in communications, told the straits times that beyond the disregard for her privacy, what enraged her was how the image had been "caricatured for entertainment and amusement".
"they blew it up and cut out our faces, and used it as a way to celebrate hari raya, a cultural event which is not even related to the photograph.
"the pa explained in a statement that the radin mas constituency office (co) had engaged a vendor, warabi enterprise (art studio), to design and put up hari raya decorations at the tiong bahru orchid estate.
the vendor came up with the concept and design for the decorations.
it downloaded and used the photo from an online source and then used it for a standee.
the decorations, including the standee, were then put up by radin mas co. [embed]https://www.
instagram.
com/p/cpag5jrbm8p/[/embed]ms sarah said: "for me, after internalising it, i felt it is really rude.
.
.
regardless of whether it was a third-party vendor (who downloaded and used the photo), it is a government agency involved.
"in the larger scheme of things, what does this reflect?
the pa is meant to be a statutory board that seeks to promote social cohesion and harmony in singapore.
"in its statement, the pa said: "this should not have happened.
neither our vendor nor radin mas co obtained any permission to do so.
this is against the policies which have been put in place.
we have since spoken to the vendor on the seriousness of this infringement, and will follow up with the appropriate steps.
"nonetheless, the pa, including radin mas co, takes responsibility for this error as we had oversight of the matter, and the decorations were allowed to be put up.
"the association added that it would take steps to guide and help staff and, as far as possible, external vendors, to be more culturally attuned and sensitive.
ms sarah said she sent an e-mail on friday to mr yong, tanjong pagar town council and pa's chief executive director, mr lim hock yu.
she added that mr lim replied to her e-mail and apologised, while minister for culture, community and youth and second minister for law edwin tong also apologised to her separately, via a private message.
[embed]https://www.
facebook.
com/pafrenz/posts/10159070929443766[/embed]mr tong is also deputy chairman of the pa. ms sarah hopes there is also "public affirmation (from the organisations involved) that there will be learning from this incident".
"the insult and insensitivity was expressed not just to me but also the entire malay/muslim community," she said.
"there needs to be greater depth to highlight what they will do beyond 'taking it more seriously' what processes there will be such that incidents like this will not be repeated. "
this article was first published in the straits times.
permission required for reproduction.
yangon: the underground government set up by opponents of myanmar's military junta said its first batch of recruits have finished training for a new defence force, releasing video of them parading in uniform.
the national unity government had announced it would form a people's defence force to challenge the army, which seized power on feb 1, ousting elected leader aung san suu kyi and plunging the country into chaos.
the video of the graduation ceremony was released on friday (may 28) in the name of yee mon, the shadow government's defence minister.
"this military is established by the official civilian government," an unidentified officer says at the ceremony.
"the people's defence force must be aligned with the people and protect the people.
we will fight to win this battle.
"a junta spokesman did not answer calls seeking comment.
the military authorities say the national unity government is treasonous and that both it and the people's defence force have beendesignated as terrorist groups.
the video shows around 100 fighters marching on a muddy parade ground in the jungle.
they march in new camouflage uniforms behind the flags of the new force, red with a white star.
they are not shown carrying weapons.
nearly four months after the coup, the army is still struggling to impose order.
anti-military protests take place daily in many parts of the country, strikes by opponents of the junta have paralysed business and fighting has flared with ethnic armed groups that oppose the junta and new militias formed to oppose it.
two homemade bombs exploded in the main city of yangon on saturday, apparently targeting a police post and an army truck, the mizzima news service said.
it said one person speaking to the soldiers had been wounded in the second incident.
the junta's forces have killed more than 800 people since the coup, according to figures cited by the united nations.
more than 4,000 people have been detained.
junta leader min aung hlaing says the civilian death toll is nearer to 300 and has said around 50 members of the police have been killed.
he gave no figure for soldiers.
groups fighting the armed forces say they have inflicted scores of casualties.
the army justified its coup on the grounds of fraud in an election swept by aung san suu kyi's party in november.
the allegations were rejected by the previous electoral commission.
aung san suu kyi, 75, is on trial on a series of charges that her lawyers say are politically motivated.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
a coronavirus surge sweeping through thailand's prisons has thrown the spotlight on the kingdom's overcrowded penal system, where some inmates have less space to sleep than the inside of a coffin.
as of saturday, almost 25,000 people have tested positive inside jails, where inmates living cheek by jowl have been encouraged to keep wearing their masks even while they sleep.
authorities have floated plans to give early releases to prisoners with underlying medical conditions and have announced funding for more testing and medical care in recent days.
but former inmates say those behind bars have been kept in the dark about the seriousness of the outbreak.
"prisoners don't have the knowledge to protect themselves," said somyot prueksakasemsuk, a high-profile activist facing charges under thailand's harsh royal defamation law.
somyot was bailed last month and told afp that he had not been tested for covid-19 once during his 10-week stint in custody.
he was not worried about contracting the disease while in jail because he had no idea about the level of risk.
"but after this i'm so scared (for everyone still inside) .
.
.
if you are inside the prison you are at risk, it's unavoidable," he said.
thailand's prison outbreak has skyrocketed from just 10 publicly announced cases a month ago and sparked growing public concern after a handful of prominent activists contracted the illness.
among them was student leader panusaya "rung" sithijirawattanakul, who helped lead a series of rallies last year demanding political reforms in the kingdom, and who tested positive after she was released on bail.
'less room than a coffin' -the thai prison population stood at around 311,000 earlier this year, the international federation for human rights said -- more than two and a half times the system's official capacity.
four inmates in every five are serving time for drug charges because of harsh anti-narcotics laws that can see offenders jailed for a decade for possessing just a few methamphetamine pills.
many cells are so packed with bodies that some inmates only have half a metre (less than two feet) of space.
"that is less room for a body than the inside of a coffin," justice minister somsak thepsutin told local media in february.
officials have tested more than 36,000 inmates in recent weeks and begun delivering covid vaccines to inmates and prison staff.
somsak said he was examining ways to give early releases to prisoners with underlying medical conditions, possibly through a royal pardon.
even if the plan goes ahead, prisoners will still have to complete a quarantine before returning home.
"for us to bail anyone or do anything, it has to be done properly," somsak told reporters on monday.
"we can't allow them to spread infections.
"rights groups say the plan should go further and urged authorities to also free non-violent offenders in order to reduce overcrowding.
"authorities should reduce the detainee population.
.
.
of those held on politically motivated charges or for minor offences," said brad adams of human rights watch.
bur-lpm/rma/gle/lba 95-year-old singaporean woman died on sunday (30 may) from covid-19 infection, the ministry of health said on the same day.
sri lankan authorities sunday said they will sue the owners of a singapore-registered cargo carrier which has burned for 11 straight days off the island's west coast and caused some of its worst-ever marine pollution.
$6,600「」,$100「」british prime minister boris johnson married his fiancee carrie symonds in a "secret ceremony" on saturday, uk media reports said.
gavin macleod, a veteran supporting actor best known for his role as an ever-smiling cruise ship captain on the 1970s-80s sitcom "the love boat," died saturday at the age of 90. ukraine's ambassador to thailand died early sunday on the southern beach island of koh lipe while on vacation with his son, police said, with the cause of death still undetermined.
smart,5%!$1,600,!us president joe biden's administration announced friday it will not return to the open skies treaty, which donald trump withdrew from, signaling a toughening stance against russia.
the ministry of health (moh) on saturday (29 may) confirmed 33 new covid-19 cases in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,003. the ministry of health (moh) on sunday (30 may) confirmed the detection of 25 new cases of covid-19 infection in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 62,028. yahoo,,,『,』,!israeli and egyptian officials held talks in both countries sunday aimed at bolstering the cairo-brokered ceasefire that ended the latest deadly flare-up of violence between the jewish state and gaza's hamas rulers.
the minimum occupation period is the period of time that you are required to physically occupy your flat before you can sell it on the open market.
the post minimum occupation period exemptions given to 4,500 households in last 3 years appeared first on icompareloan.
vietnam has discovered a new covid-19 variant which spreads quickly by air and is a combination of the indian and british strains, health officials confirmed saturday.
$120$12,000,9,sc mobile!the theory that covid-19 might be the result of scientific experiments has thrown a spotlight on the work of the world's most secure biolabs.
prime minister lee hsien loong will deliver a live speech on monday (31 may) regarding singapore's approach to reopening while also controlling the spread of covid-19 within its borders.
jessica liu, president of lazada group, is leaving the southeast asian online shopping unit of alibaba group holding ltd. 《!》ut,!more than 20 horses have died of starvation in just one month at bangladesh's most popular resort district, the animals' owners said sunday, as the country's tourism industry reels from the pandemic's economic fallout.
residents of a small french town laid cards and flowers saturday at the spot where a "very kind" and "gentle" policewoman was seriously wounded in a knife attack the day before, the latest in a spate of attacks on officers.
six hundred russian soldiers requested by the central african republic this month are "unarmed instructors," moscow's deputy ambassador to the united nations said friday.
,.
!the us customs agency announced friday it would block imports of products from china's dalian ocean fishing co for alleged use of forced labor and abuse of workers on its tuna vessels.
russian president vladimir putin took belarus strongman alexander lukashenko for a boat trip on saturday as the close allies met for a second day and held "informal talks" amid the outcry after minsk diverted a european plane.
"yesterday was the day of official talks and today it's informal," kremlin spokesman dmitri peskov told reporters of the meetings in sotchi on the black sea.
libya's military strongman khalifa haftar is polishing his political image ahead of elections, after a crippling rout on the battlefield and with his support waning at home and abroad, analysts say.

                    wednesday, 26 may 2021
                singapore (the straits times/ann): convinced he was taking an x-ray via the phone, as instructed by who he thought was a police officer, the student posed topless, blindfolded and gagged, while on a video call.
the 21-year-old believed he was speaking to a police officer from china, who had told him there was an outstanding warrant against him for money laundering offences.
but the "officer" was actually a scammer, who then sent a recording of the student blindfolded and gagged to his parents in china, demanding they pay a ransom of 6 million yuan (s$1.
2 million).
the scammers had contacted the student earlier this month, and convinced him he was under investigation.
besides getting him to pose for the "x-ray", they also told him to cease all contact with his friends and family.
the scammers then told a 33-year-old man here to pass the student a mobile phone and sim card.
the man also booked a hotel room for the student to stay in.
it is believed the man, who has been arrested by the police, received $1,000 from the scammers to do so.
from the hotel, the student was put in touch with a 61-year-old man here.
he was then offered temporary accommodation at the man's home.
this man is also being investigated.
preliminary investigations by the police found that both the men were themselves victims of the scam.
in the case of the 61-year-old, the scammers had allegedly told him the student was an important witness.
after the student had initially stopped contacting his family and friends, his parents in china made a police report on may 16.  they received the ransom demand on may 20, but did not pay up.
later that day, the police here found the student safe at the residence of the 61-year-old man.
speaking to the media on tuesday (may 25), the student said he was not harmed throughout the ruse, but wanted to warn other foreign students studying in singapore to be wary.
he said: "the reason why i believed the scammers was that they had some of my personal information.
i've heard some of my friends have had similar experiences, but i never thought it would happen to me.
"last year, close to $40 million was lost here to scammers impersonating officials from china.
this was despite there being a slight decrease in the number of cases from 456 in 2019 to 443 last year.
in one case, the scammers made off with some $4.
2 million.
superintendent of police steven tan, head of anti-scam investigation at the commercial affairs department, advised members of the public to hang up on unsolicited phone calls when in doubt, and to check with the police.
he said: "the china police, interpol and other overseas law enforcement agencies have no jurisdiction or powers to conduct operations in singapore.
they also have no powers to ask members of the public to help with any form of investigation without the approval of the singapore government.
"those convicted of cheating can be jailed for up to 10 years and fined.
those convicted of money laundering can be jailed for up to 10 years and/or fined up to $500,000.
the straits times/asia news network 
tags / keywords:
singapore
                                                                ,
                                                                                                china
                                                                ,
                                                                                                scam
                                                                ,
                                                                                                student
                                                                ,
                                                                                                kidnap



report it to us.
thank you for your report!copyright © 1995-
            

 star media group berhad (10894d)best viewed on chrome browsers.
{{item['v1 header']}}
   {{item['v1 body']}}

  {{item['v2 header']}}

we would love to keep you posted on the latest promotion.
kindly fill the form belowwe hope you enjoy this feature!
president biden took an important but limited step wednesday toward a genuine investigation into the origins of covid-19.
he issued an order directing his intelligence agencies to "redouble their efforts" to look into the two competing hypotheses about the source of the pandemic (a random viral spillover in nature or an accident at one of the chinese labs studying bat coronaviruses in wuhan).
but this represents just one aspect of a growing u. s.  government and congressional effort to finally try — as best we can —  to get to the bottom of how the pandemic started.
multiple senior administration officials told me that biden's statement, which came the day after china publicly refused to cooperate with further world health organization investigations, was meant to signal a new, broader phase of the u. s.  inquiry.
after receiving an initial u. s.  intelligence community assessment two weeks ago as part of his president's daily brief, these officials said, biden decided to declassify some of it and send the intel community back to do more digging.
but now he's also including a range of other federal institutions.
over the next 90 days, this investigation could and should examine any and all information on the wuhan institute of virology held by the u. s.  national institutes of health, including the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases, the u. s.  agency for international development, the defense department, the department of homeland security and the national science foundation.
the list also includes the nonprofit organization ecohealth alliance, which channeled u. s.  funding to the wuhan lab.
this expanded scope will, it's hoped, enable the intelligence community to do better than simply claim there's not enough evidence to make a high-confidence assessment in either direction.
but that's not going to be the end of the process, not by a long shot.
full coverage of the coronavirus pandemic"we are not saying that in 90 days we will have an answer or the answer, we're saying in 90 days we are going to have an update, and then we will see where we go from there," a senior administration official told me.
"this is a commitment to redouble our efforts and be as transparent as we can.
"biden's officials acknowledge he acted in part due to rising public and congressional pressure to explore the lab accident theory, an effort supported by an ever-growing pile of circumstantial evidence and an ever-growing list of top scientists.
but they insist biden himself always believed the lab accident theory was plausible and needed investigation.
even so, there's concern on capitol hill that the white house may use the new investigation to thwart several ongoing inquiries by lawmakers.
and republicans still doubt that biden is willing to exert significant pressure on beijing.
on tuesday, the senate unanimously passed an amendment that would ban all u. s.  government funding to the wuhan institute of virology, where — according to both the trump and biden administrations —  chinese scientists were conducting secret coronavirus research with the chinese military and where researchers got sick with covid-like symptoms.
in the house, democratic leaders are now openly calling for a public investigation into the lab leak theory.
sen.  marco rubio (r-fla. ) told me he is preparing sanctions legislation to push for a transparent forensic investigation into the wuhan lab and "impose costs if beijing doesn't allow one. "
lawmakers also want to probe the failures of the u. s.  intelligence agencies, including why they were caught flat-footed   when the pandemic hit: why did they have no idea what was going on inside this network of chinese labs conducting risky research?
and that obviously can't be part of the intelligence community's own investigation.
some say there's little likelihood that the intelligence community or congress will be able to find a conclusive answer on the lab leak theory in 90 days — if ever.
biden alluded to this possibility in his statement, saying beijing's actions to cover up and conceal events in wuhan early on "will always hamper any investigation into the origin of covid-19.
"even if ironclad proof can't be found, that doesn't absolve us of the responsibility to keep looking.
along the way we need to completely rethink how we manage oversight of these chinese labs and all the u. s.  labs that work with them.
the answers may be complicated.
but if it should turn out that most of the evidence points to the wuhan labs, are lab leak skeptics really going to propose we do nothing and just wait for the next pandemic?put simply, it has become amply clear that these chinese labs, which have a record of safety lapses, operate with little transparency and zero accountability, which means they present an ongoing risk that must be mitigated.
the intelligence community's job is to collect intelligence.
it's the policymakers and the legislators who will have to use that intelligence to formulate a response in the form of policies and laws.
some say pursuing the lab leak investigation risks upsetting complex and fragile u. s. -china relations.
well, if uncovering the truth about 591,000 american deaths doesn't warrant risking offending the delicate sensibilities of the chinese communist party, what would?
there's no statute of limitations on 3 million deaths worldwide.
this is not going away.
this is not about "blaming china. "
this is about protecting our public health.
read more:the post's view: who were the first coronavirus cases?
china should help solve the mystery.
marc thiessen: the media's dereliction of duty on the lab leak theoryjosh rogin: biden is passing the buck on the covid origin investigationchristine emba: why conservatives really fear critical race theoryken dryden: it's 'the code' of the nhl, and it has no cure for stupid1coronavirus maps: cases and deaths in the u. s.  | cases and deaths worldwidevaccines: younger teens | tracker by state | guidance for vaccinated people | how long does immunity last?
| county-level vaccine datawhat you need to know: variants | symptoms guide | masks faq | your life at home | personal finance guide | follow all of our coverage and sign up for our free newslettergot a pandemic question?
we answer one every day in our coronavirus newsletterare you still deciding whether you'll get a covid-19 vaccine?
let us know.
the most important news stories of the day, curated by post editors and delivered every morning.
by signing up you agree to our terms of use and privacy policy
tokyo — japan will allow residents from myanmar to stay an additional six months as an emergency measure as a violent military-led crackdown continues in the southeast asian country, officials said friday.
the measure covers 35,045 myanmar nationals living in japan, including 13,963 working under a government-sponsored internship program, according to the immigration services agency.
those aiming to obtain "specified skilled worker" status can extend their stay up to a year, it said.
the new category was created in 2019 as japan increasingly relies on foreign workers to make up for its aging and declining workforce.
the government also said two myanmar diplomats in tokyo who were dismissed by their country's military junta for supporting the anti-coup movement can keep their diplomatic visas issued by the ousted government of aung san suu kyi.
also friday, the u. n.  special envoy for myanmar, christine schraner burgener, met with japanese foreign minister toshimitsu motegi and discussed support for an effort by the association of southeast asian nations to hold a dialogue of all stakeholders on stopping the violence in myanmar.
burgener said she has been in consultation with all parties and asean leaders and hopes to be able to give more details in two to three weeks.
the feb.  1 coup reversed years of progress toward democracy in myanmar after five decades of harsh military rule.
it was met with widespread popular opposition that the military has tried to silence through force, including killing protesters and imprisoning activists and journalists.
the most important news stories of the day, curated by post editors and delivered every morning.
by signing up you agree to our terms of use and privacy policy
singapore: singapore reported 23 new covid-19 cases in the community and one dormitory case on wednesday (may 26).
twenty-one of the cases were linked to previous infections, of which 14 had already been placed in quarantine and seven were detected through surveillance.
the remaining three were unlinked.
there were also two imported cases.
both were placed on stay-home notice upon arrival in singapore.
singapore reported 26 new covid-19 cases in total on wednesday.
three students, pastor among new cases linked to jem/westgate clustertwo primary school students, an ite student and a pastor were among the seven new covid-19 community cases linked to the jem/westgate cluster.
case 63728, an 11-year-old boy, and case 63729, a six-year-old girl, are both students at concord primary school and had last gone to school on may 17. they are family members of case 63357 – a 32-year-old it engineer at abbvie operations singapore – and were placed in quarantine on may 21. case 63728 developed a cough on may 22 but did not report his symptoms and case 63729 developed flu-like symptoms on may 24.  they were confirmed to have covid-19 on may 25. case 63735 is an 18-year-old singaporean student at ite college west.
he was last in school on may 14. he is a family member and household contact of two previous cases and was placed in quarantine on may 23.  he developed a sore throat on the same day and fever the following day.
he reported his symptoms and was tested on may 25.  his test result came back positive on the same day.
another new case linked to this cluster is case 63733, a 30-year-old pastor at grace assembly church.
she visited jem on may 11. she was asymptomatic and was detected when she was tested on may 24 as part of moh's testing operations for those who visited the malls.
her test result came back positive for covid-19 on may 25. the other cases linked to this cluster on wednesday are a 29-year-old singaporean man who works as a technician at singapore refining company, a 67-year-old singaporean man who works as a delivery driver for dch auriga (singapore) and a 28-year-old singaporean woman who works as a hairdresser at kimage hair salon at lot 1 shoppers' mall in choa chu kang.
the 67-year-old delivery driver frequently delivered goods at jem and westgate shopping malls.
he has tested preliminarily positive for the b1617 variant, which was first detected in india, and is pending further confirmatory tests.
he is fully vaccinated.
as of wednesday, 60 cases in total are linked to the jem/westgate cluster.
new cluster linked to secondary school studenta new cluster linked to a 15-year-old westwood secondary school student, case 63708, has been identified.
the cluster involves the student, a 46-year-old singaporean woman who works as a secretary at prestige legal (case 63709) and a new infection reported on wednesday.
the new case, case 63746, is a 74-year-old malaysian retiree.
he is a family member and household contact of case 63709, and was placed in quarantine on may 25. he developed a cough and a fever on the same day, and was tested for covid-19.
his test result came back positive.
his serology test result is negative.
the retiree received his first dose of the covid-19 vaccine on mar 19. two more new clusters identifiedthe ministry also identified two more covid-19 clusters – one linked to the hong ye group cleaners, and another to a 34-year-old technician at singapore refining company.
the new cluster linked to hong ye group has three cases.
the latest case reported on wednesday was case 63740, a 25-year-old singaporean woman employed by hong ye group as a cleaner at changi business park.
she was last at work on may 22 and was quarantined on the same day after she was identified as a close contact of a previous case.
she tested positive on may 26. the other new cluster that has been identified is linked to a 34-year-old singaporean man who works as a technician at the singapore refining company.
the most recent case linked to this cluster was reported on wednesday.
case 63741 is a two-year-old singaporean girl who is a student at my first skool at 331 sembawang close.
she is a family member and household contact of two previous cases.
she tested positive on may 25 while in quarantine.
new unlinked casesthree unlinked cases were detected through surveillance.
case 63725 is a 58-year-old singaporean woman who works at chevy's bar and bistro.
she developed a fever on may 22 and a runny nose on may 24.  she sought treatment at a general practitioner on the same day, and underwent both an antigen rapid test (art) and a polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test.
she was immediately isolated after the art result came back positive on the same day.
her pcr test result came back positive on may 25.  she received her first dose of the covid-19 vaccine on may 4. the two other unlinked cases reported on wednesday are a 38-year-old malaysian man who works at rong chang f&b services and a 24-year-year-old malaysian man who works at mcdonald's at the woodgrove.
changi prison complex clusterthe changi prison complex cluster grew to 12 cases after another inmate tested positive for covid-19.
the 49-year-old singaporean man was identified as a close contact of a previous case and was placed in quarantine on may 13. he tested negative for covid-19 on may 13, 17, 18, 19 and 21, but tested positive on may 24.  he developed diarrhoea on may 25. learning point clustera 35-year-old thai woman who works at santai cafe at united world college was linked to the learning point cluster.
she is a family member and household contact of a previous case and placed in quarantine on may 23.  she developed a sore throat, body aches and headache on may 24, and tested positive for covid-19 the following day.
the cluster now has 32 linked cases.
marina bay sands casino dealer clustera 36-year-old malaysian man who works as a dealer at marina bay sands casino was added to the cluster, which now has seven cases.
he was last at work on may 14.  he is a household contact of three previous cases and placed in quarantine on may 16.  he tested positive for covid-19 on may 25 after developing a headache and fever the day before.
mcdonald's delivery riders clustertwo women, a 41-year-old permanent resident and a 58-year-old singaporean woman, were added to the cluster involving mcdonald's delivery riders, which now has 15 cases.
the permanent resident works as a receptionist at wanderloft hostel and as a part-time waitress at collins at nex shopping mall.
the singaporean woman works at mcdonald's at pasir ris elias community club as a member of the kitchen staff and service crew.
personal chauffeur clustera 31-year-old hong kong citizen who works as a senior executive at endowus was added to the cluster involving a 53-year-old singaporean personal chauffeur.
the 31-year-old was identified as a family member and household contact of two previous cases.
his quarantine was extended when he was found to be a household contact of another two infections.
he was tested on may 21 and may 23, and his results were negative.
he developed a cough on may 24 and he was tested for covid-19.
the test result came back positive the following day.
this cluster now has eight cases.
other linked casesthe four remaining community cases include a 20-year-old national university of singapore student who works part-time at poke theory (novena).
she is a family member and close contact of a previous case.
she tested positive on may 26. the other linked cases are a 64-year-old singaporean woman who is a homemaker, a 52-year-old singaporean woman who works at chevy's bar and bistro and a 38-year-old permanent resident who works at tektronix southeast asia.
new dormitory caseone new dormitory case was added to the cluster at harvest @ woodlands.
case 63723 is a 22-year-old indian national who works as a general worker at h&w communications, and is a roommate of a previous case, who also works in the same company.
case 63723 was asymptomatic and was detected when he was tested for covid-19 on may 24 during quarantine.
his test result came back positive for covid-19 on the same day.
his earlier tests from rostered routine testing – the last being on may 12 – were negative for covid-19.
his serology test result is negative.
2 imported casestwo new imported cases were reported on wednesday.
one is a foreign domestic worker who arrived from indonesia, and the other is a short-term visit pass holder who arrived from the united arab emirates to visit his singaporean family member.
both imported cases were placed on stay-home notice upon arrival in singapore and were tested during their stay-home notice period.
2 cases in intensive care unitmoh said overall, the number of new cases in the community has decreased from 187 cases in the week before to 165 cases in the past week.
the number of unlinked cases in the community has also decreased from 40 cases in the week before to 30 cases in the past week.
among the 227 cases reported from may 20 to may 26, 54 have tested positive for their serology tests and 138 have tested negative.
another 35 serology test results are pending.
thirty-one more cases have been discharged from hospitals or community isolation facilities, bringing the total number of recoveries in singapore to 61,360. there are currently 242 cases still in the hospital, most of whom are stable or improving.
two are in critical condition in the intensive care unit.
another 282 cases are isolated and cared for at community facilities.
as of wednesday, singapore has reported a total of 61,916 covid-19 cases and 32 fatalities.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
by nectar gan and jessie yeung, cnnupdated 0940 gmt (1740 hkt) may 28, 2021 hong kong (cnn)us president joe biden's call for a renewed investigation into the origins of the coronavirus feels like déjà vu in beijing.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore people were cheated of more than $200,000 by a new type of loan scam in the first four months of this year, with at least 20 police reports made.
the police issued an advisory on wednesday (may 26) warning the public of it.
the scam starts with victims receiving unsolicited text messages or coming across websites or advertisements offering loans.
when victims respond, they are redirected to a whatsapp chat, during which scammers ask for their personal particulars to "process" the loan application.
the scammers then send fake letters or e-mails, supposedly from banks or government agencies such as the state courts or the monetary authority of singapore, seeking payment for processing or transfer fees.
"these letters could indicate that the processing fee or tax payment would be required under specific regulations before the loan could be disbursed," the police said.
"victims only realised that they had been scammed when they did not receive the loan.
"last month, the police had said that more than $3.
9 million had been lost in the first four months of the year to a scam in which conmen posed as singapore high court or interpol officials.
in recent months, the police have also warned of a text message scam advertising fake jobs and one in which people receive a text message claiming that their bank accounts have been suspended.
the overall crime rate in singapore was pushed to its highest in more than 10 years last year, with a record number of scams reported, climbing 65 per cent from 2019.  with more internet traffic, many of these were e-commerce scams.
the police on wednesday reminded the public that licensed moneylenders are not allowed to approach potential borrowers via text messages, phone calls or social media platforms.
a fully online loan transaction is also not allowed, and licensed moneylenders must meet borrowers at the approved place of business to verify their identity before granting loans.
any administrative fee will also not be sought from the borrower before the loan is dispensed, much less in payment to any government agency.
any such fee should instead be deducted from the loan principal.
people are advised to ignore or block and report such messages.
they should not provide personal information such as their nric, singpass or bank account details to anyone.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
a 57-year-old man has been arrested for using a homemade sling to shoot metal bolts and nuts at vehicles in serangoon central.
the police said in a statement that they received several reports between january and may where metal bolts and nuts were shot into moving and stationary vehicles at an open-air carpark in serangoon central.
through ground investigations, and with the aid of forensics and the images from police cameras, officers from ang mo kio police division established the identity of the man and arrested him on thursday (may 27).
the man will be charged in court on friday (may 28) for the rash acts.
the offence of rash act carries a jail term of up to six months, or a fine of up to $2,500, or both.
"the police have zero tolerance against acts that endanger the lives or safety of others and will not hesitate to take action against those who blatantly disregard the law," the police said.
get more of stomp's latest updates by following us on facebook, whatsapp, twitter, instagram and youtube.
view the discussion thread.
view the discussion thread.
download the new stomp app today.
sph digital news | the straits timesall rights reserved | terms & conditions | data protection policy | advertise with ussph digital news / stomp / copyright (c) 2019 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
yangon (reuters) a myanmar military tribunal has sentenced 28 people to 20 years in jail with hard labour for arson attacks on two factories, state media reported, after a string of mainly chinese-financed plants were torched during unrest in yangon in march.
the army-run myawady news portal said the offenders had targeted facilities making shoes and garments in the industrial hlaing tharyar suburb of myanmar's biggest city.
martial law was imposed in the suburb after the blazes, with dozens killed or wounded when security forces opened fire on anti-military protesters, media and an activist group said.
the chinese embassy in myanmar said at the time that many chinese staff were injured and trapped in the arson attacks and called on the authorities to protect chinese property and citizens.
a total of 32 chinese-invested factories were vandalised, with property losses reaching 240 million yuan (s$50 million), china's state-controlled tabloid global times said in march.
beijing is viewed as being supportive of the military junta that overthrew the elected government of ms aung san suu kyi on feb 1. no group claimed responsibility for burning the factories.
myanmar has been in chaos since the army took power and arrested ms suu kyi and other members or her party, with daily protests, marches and strikes.
security forces have responded with lethal force, killing more than 800 people, according to the assistance association for political prisoners activist group.
the military disputes this figure and coup leader min aung hlaing recently said about 300 people had been killed in the unrest, including 47 police personnel.
as well as renewed conflict with ethnic forces in border areas, fighting has also escalated between myanmar's army and often rag-tag militias opposed to the military in some regions.
in eastern myanmar near the border of shan and kayah states, dozens of security forces and local fighters have been killed in recent fighting, according to residents and media reports.
a resident taking refuge near the town of demoso reported on friday (may 28) that power was down and fighting had flared on thursday night with the constant thud of artillery.
"we feared that the bombs will hit us.
it made me tremble as they were constantly firing," said the resident, who asked not to be identified.
she said everyone had fled demoso and estimated that more than 40,000 people were taking refuge in areas around the town and were in need of food, clothing and shelter.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
sydney australia's second-most populous state of victoria will enter a one-week covid-19 lockdown forcing its near seven million residents to stay home except for essential business, as the authorities struggle to contain a highly-infectious outbreak.
"we are dealing with a highly infectious strain of the virus, a variant of concern, which is running faster than we have ever recorded," victoria state acting premier james merlino told reporters in melbourne, the state capital.
"unless something drastic happens, this will become increasingly uncontrollable.
"mr merlino said contact tracers have identified more than 10,000 primary and secondary contacts who will need to quarantine, test and self isolate, adding "that number will continue to grow and change".
the fresh cluster of infections in melbourne detected early this week swelled to 26 yesterday after 12 new cases overnight, while the number of virus-exposed sites rose above 150. victoria state chief health officer brett sutton said he "absolutely expects" more positive cases to emerge in the coming days as the variant, first detected in india, was likely to be more virulent than the original strains.
the current strain can take one day to infect another person compared with earlier strains, which can take about five or six days, mr merlino said.
under the lockdown, from 11.
59pm yesterday until june 3, people will be allowed to leave their homes only for essential work, healthcare, grocery shopping, exercise or to get a coronavirus vaccination.
several infected contacts have visited crowded hot spots that included sports stadiums and one of the largest shopping centres in the country, raising concerns of a significant outbreak days ahead of the winter season.
the lockdown comes just days after the authorities reinstated coronavirus curbs for melbourne, limiting gathering sizes and making masks mandatory in restaurants, hotels and other indoor locations until june 4.  reutersget the new paper on your phone with the free tnp app.
download from the apple app store or google play store now
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore the authorities have asked that a poll to rate the attractiveness of ustazah, or female islamic religious teachers, with a view to committing sexual violence against them be removed from social media platforms here.
on friday (may 28), the infocomm media development authority (imda) said the poll constitutes prohibited content under singapore's internet code of practice, and has no place here.
the poll on social media platform mewe came to light on wednesday, and is currently under police investigation.
"a poll on local female asatizah (religious teachers).
.
.
promotes sexual violence or sexual activity involving coercion or non-consent.
such content is unacceptable and has no place in singapore," said imda.
it added that it has contacted mewe to remove the offending poll if it still remains on the platform.
imda has also spoken to other social media platforms to ensure that the post does not surface on their platforms.
minister for communications and information josephine teo said in a facebook post on friday that the poll was "revolting", and that she condemned it in the "strongest terms".
"whoever is behind this isn't just trying to be funny.
they have designed a deliberate exercise to demean women, and especially women who have dedicated themselves to upholding their faith," said mrs teo, who is also chairman of the people's action party's women's wing.
the mewe poll was first highlighted by ustaz muhammad zahid mohd zin late on wednesday in an instagram post.
mewe allows users to post comments, start polls, message one another and have group discussions.
many netizens, including other asatizah, have since uploaded similar screenshots of the post to criticise it.
the list shows at least 12 asatizah being ranked, with 1,005 participating in the poll.
the straits times understands that about 20 to 30 asatizah were ranked in it.
the islamic religious council of singapore (muis) said on thursday that it was aware of the post, which had caused "immense distress" to the individuals involved, and was very concerned by it.
the council has lodged a police report to expedite investigations into the matter and "bring the perpetrators to justice".
other muslim groups have also spoken out against the poll.
the singapore muslim women's association said on thursday that it stood in solidarity with the women who are affected by the poll, which it called "deplorable and unacceptable".
the group said that it was shocked at how more than 1,000 people had voted in the poll, and it urged the authorities to investigate the matter thoroughly so that the perpetrators are held accountable and counselled.
several netizens have alleged that those who started the poll were students studying to become asatizah, and have urged muis to not accredit them.
the singaporean students welfare assembly in egypt told the straits times that it had published a letter on wednesday to show that it does not condone such acts, and that it stands with the people who have been affected.
beyond the hijab, a website focusing on the experiences of muslim women in singapore, said on its twitter account: "we are very disturbed by the fact that the group is allegedly comprised mostly of undergrads of islamic studies and therefore potential future teachers.
"this is not behaviour that teachers, as people in positions of power, should have.
it would not be safe for (their) students.
"mrs teo joins several leaders who have spoken out strongly against the poll on thursday, including president halimah yacob, minister-in-charge of muslim affairs masagos zulkifli and minister in the prime minister's office maliki osman.
she added that her ministry will continue to work on protecting women and girls from online harm.
"whether offline or online, respect and safety for women must be the norm.
there should be no question about it," she said.
parliamentary secretary for communications and information rahayu mahzam said she deeply appreciated the clear stance from imda that offensive content like the poll has no place in society here.
noting that there is much online harm faced by women and girls that often goes unaddressed, she pointed out that the ministry has been working on a singapore together alliance for action workgroup to discuss, co-create solutions and act against such harm.
"an overarching theme that surfaced during our discussions is the importance of cultivating a culture of respect for singaporean women both online and offline," said ms rahayu.
"behaviours that perpetuate sexual harassment must be condemned.
i hope singaporeans, both men and women, will work towards a safer and more responsible online culture in singapore and with mutual respect for all.
"join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
kuala lumpur: malaysia on friday (may 28) reported itsfourth straight dayof record new covid-19 cases with 8,290 infections.
this is the first time malaysia's daily covid-19 caseload has breached the 8,000 mark.
it also comes after several consecutive days ofrecord numbers of intensive care unit patients.
the national tally now stands at 549,514 covid-19 cases, of which 72,823 are currently active or infectious.
malaysia has set records for the highest number of new daily cases seven times in the past 10 days, with the daily countabove the 6,000 marksince may 19. more than a quarter of the new cases reported on friday were in the klang valley area with 2,052 in selangor and 830 in kuala lumpur.
johor had 762 cases while sarawak and penang reported 698 and 421 cases respectively.
according to the health ministry's latest data modelling, daily covid-19 cases may near the 9,000 mark by early june if safe management measures are not followed.
there are currently 808 patients in the intensive care unit, a new record for the fourth consecutive day.
of these, 403 require respiratory support.
sixty-one more covid-19 fatalities, aged between 27 and 92 were reported, pushing malaysia's death toll to 2,552.  two of the victims are foreigners while 59 are citizens.
the 27-year-old woman was "brought in dead" to hospital kuala lumpur.
two other victims also died at home in selangor and kelantan.
the health ministry also identified 21 new clusters, taking the number of active clusters in the country to 614.  among them is a cluster of 37 cases in kedah as a result of visiting during the festive season.
in an update on thursday, the health ministry said there was an increase in the number of fatalities that were "brought in dead" for the period of may 1 to may 25.  these are covid-19 victims who did not die in a hospital.
a total of 93 "brought in dead" cases were reported for this period, compared to 35 victims in april this year.
this is an increase of 165.
7 per cent, said the ministry.
examples of victims who were "brought in dead" are patients who experienced symptoms such as fever and cough but did not undergo a covid-19 test.
they were then found dead in their homes several days later.
other "brought in dead" cases include those who tested positive for covid-19 but died at home before they could be transported to the hospital, as well as those who did not treat their symptoms seriously and opted to recuperate at home.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
china and the us are currently at loggerheads over a host of issues (representational)china's military today criticised the biden administration for continuing the trump era "indo-pacific strategy", saying the us should not form "cliques" or provoke "new cold war" featuring bloc confrontation.
no strategy should instigate countries to establish selective and exclusive military alliances, to gang up or to create the "new cold war" featuring bloc confrontation, and the zero-sum game will only lead to more division, antagonism and chaos, senior colonel tan kefei, spokesperson for the chinese ministry of national defence, said at an online press conference.
he made the remarks while responding to a question that us president joe biden has continued to promote the "indo-pacific strategy" formulated by his predecessor donald trump to deter china and made frequent military provocations against beijing.
his comments come a week after a us navy guided-missile destroyer sailed through the taiwan strait on may 19, challenging china's claims over the area as beijing claims taiwan as part of its mainland.
the chinese navy, which rushed its ships to pursue the american warship, accused the us of resorting to provocative moves.
the us navy's 7th fleet said in a statement, "the ship's transit through the taiwan strait demonstrates the us commitment to a free and open indo-pacific.
"senior colonel tan did not directly refer to the quadrilateral alliance or quad comprising the us, india, australia and japan while accusing washington of forming cliques.
however, the chinese foreign ministry has in recent weeks stepped up attacks on the four-nation alliance, terming it as an exclusive clique portraying china as a challenge and sowing discord between beijing and regional countries.
senior colonel tan, while claiming that china always holds that no strategy should go against the historical trend of peace and development, or deliberately hype up conflict and confrontation, said that intensifying military presence and highlighting military competition will only aggravate regional tensions and endanger world peace and stability.
"no strategy should harm the welfare of people in regional countries, or put them in a dangerous situation.
seeking one's own selfish interests and unilateral absolute security will only do harm to others and lose their support," he was quoted as saying by the chinese military online.
referring to the reported comments by a us defence department official that the us government intends to put in place more defence hotlines with china to manage security risks and prevent potential conflicts, the chinese defence ministry spokesperson said that for a long time, the chinese and american militaries have always maintained communication through multiple channels, including the direct line between the two defence ministries.
"we believe that its purpose is to enhance trust, reduce misgivings, manage crises, and prevent conflicts.
the us side should not, on the one hand, claim to put up new defence hotlines, while on the other hand keep ramping up military deployments in the asian pacific region, frequently conduct close-in reconnaissance on china, and even deliberately initiate dangerous circumstances where aircraft and vessels nearly collide," he said.
he said that china advises the us side to keep their words and match their deeds accordingly, display sincerity, work with the chinese side toward the same goal, and push forward the healthy and stable development of mil-to-mil relations by intensifying dialogue and communication and properly managing divergences.
china and the us are currently at loggerheads over a host of issues as the biden administration continued the tough policy to contain china initiated by trump, targeting beijing on xinjiang, hong kong and taiwan.
biden beefed-up the us-china policy by uniting us allies like the uk, the eu and japan.
he also hosted the first quadrilateral summit of the emerging alliance called quad in march which included the us, australia, japan and india.
(except for the headline, this story has not been edited by ndtv staff and is published from a syndicated feed.
)track latest news live on ndtv.
com and get news updates from india and around the world.
watch live news:follow us:.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
advertisement .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
washington: the us intelligence community on thursday (may 27) acknowledged its agencies had two theories on where the coronavirus originated, with two agencies believing it emerged naturally from human contact with infected animals and a third embracing a possible laboratory accident as the source of the covid-19 pandemic.
"the us intelligence community does not know exactly where, when, or how the covid-19 virus was transmitted initially but has coalesced around two likely scenarios," the office of the director of national intelligence (odni) said, adding that the majority believes there is not "sufficient information to assess one to be more likely than the other.
"the odni statement did not identify which two of the 17 agencies constituting the us intelligence community believes the virus had originated with infected animals and which agency believes it originated with a laboratory accident.
in both cases, however, odni said the agencies that back one theory of origin or the other did so with "low or moderate confidence" which in spy jargon means they believe the evidence supporting their view is far from conclusive.
a source familiar with intelligence community analyses said neither the cia nor the defense intelligence agency presently favour either alternative explanation for the virus' origin, adding they were among the large majority of us agencies who believe information presently is insufficient to determine that one scenario was more likely than the other.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
washington: the united states is looking to convene an in-person meeting of its partners in the quad group of countries australia, india and japan in the fall with a focus on infrastructure, president joe biden's policy coordinator for the indo-pacific said on wednesday (may 26).
kurt campbell said other countries would be welcome to work with the quad, which held a first virtual leaders' summit in march and pledged to work closely on covid-19 vaccine distribution, climate issues and security.
"i think we want to look this fall to convene an in-person quad and the hope will be to make a similar kind of engagement on infrastructure more generally," campbell told an online event hosted by stanford university's shorenstein asia-pacific research center.
"and i do want to underscore .
.
.
this is not a fancy club.
if there are other countries that believe that they'd like to engage and work with us, the door will be open as we go forward," campbell said.
the march quad summit was carefully choreographed to counter china's growing influence and biden and his fellow leaders pledged to work to ensure a free and open indo-pacific in the face of challenges from beijing.
at that meeting, the leaders agreed an in-person summit would be held later in the year.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
hong kong • hong kong's security chief sent letters to media tycoon jimmy lai and branches of hsbc and citibank this month, threatening up to seven years' jail for any dealings with the billionaire's accounts in the city, according to documents seen by reuters.
the letters, signed by secretary for security john lee, were sent to lai after the hong kong authorities announced the freezing of his majority stake in publisher next digital and local accounts of three companies owned by him under a sweeping new national security law.
one of lai's financial advisers said that while the amount of funds in the accounts was relatively small, they represented the hong kong management end of a global network of banking relationships covering his private wealth.
three senior private bankers and three corporate lawyers independent from lai's accounts said the action extended the tightening national security apparatus into elite tiers of the banking system for the first time, exposing risks for clients and top financial managers in hong kong.
lai's advisers are seeking guidance from bankers and lawyers on how to challenge the freeze, and its impact on offshore holdings and banking relationships managed through hong kong until now.
the action by the security secretary is also fuelling concern about the broader investment climate in the city, given the potential reach of the security law, imposed on the former british colony last june by china's parliament, say lawyers, bankers and diplomats.
the moves could imperil any attempt by the democracy activist to move offshore assets back home to prop up next's troubled apple daily tabloid, a staunch government critic, the financial adviser said.
shares in next digital rose as much as 330 per cent as they resumed trading yesterday.
lai has emerged as one of the highest-profile targets of the new law and is facing three national security charges including allegedly colluding with a foreign country.
the letter to him, sent to the city's high-security stanley prison, threatens up to seven years' jail and an unspecified fine for any dealing in the named assets, including disposal or conversion, using them as collateral or transferring them in or out of hong kong.
the letter lists seven hong kong accounts that are linked to three companies registered in the british virgin islands.
they also acknowledge the right of lai and the banks to challenge the notice, which expires in may 2023, in court.
the same language was used in letters to hsbc and citibank, according to the documents seen by reuters.
the hong kong monetary authority, the banking regulator, said banks had to cooperate with law enforcement agencies in criminal investigations, including freezing of assets under relevant laws, which includes the national security law.
lai, 73, told reuters last may that, given the pressure building on him, the bulk of his personal wealth was offshore.
he is serving a 14-month prison sentence for taking part in unauthorised assemblies during anti-government protests that rocked hong kong in 2019. reutersjoin st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
chris versace, tematica research chief investment officer, joins yahoo finance to discuss the outlook on the market and inflation concerns.
john macphee, the jed foundation executive director & ceo, joins yahoo finance to discuss&nbsp;the importance of mental health programs and resources within schools.
myles udland breaks down the morning brief, which details how vital the may jobs report in determining transitory inflation will be and if the fed will be compelled to change its stance in the market.
!smart759 ,5%,smart!u.
s.  consumer prices surged in april, with a measure of underlying inflation blowing past the federal reserve's 2% target and posting its largest annual gain since 1992, reflecting pent-up demand as the economy reopens.
the strong inflation readings reported by the commerce department on friday had been widely anticipated as the covid-19 pandemic's grip eases, thanks to vaccinations, and will have no impact on monetary policy.
fed chair jerome powell has repeatedly stated that higher inflation will be transitory, with supply chains expected to adapt and become more efficient.
while commodity prices fell after chinese warnings over onshore speculation, "the fundamental path in key commodities such as oil, copper and soybeans remains orientated towards incremental tightness in h2, with scant evidence of a supply response sufficient to derail this bull market. "
the market is beginning to reflect this, as copper prices are increasingly driven by western manufacturing data rather their chinese counterparts, it said.
"this is a role reversal from the bull market of the 2000's, with china now the incumbent consumer as the u. s.  was when emerging chinese demand squeezed out marginal u. s consumers," goldman said.
(bloomberg) -- credit suisse group ag executives ignored warnings from colleagues about troubled steel tycoon sanjeev gupta as they channeled $1.
2 billion of client funds to his businesses, according to people familiar with the matter.
bankers in credit suisse's commodity trade-finance unit blacklisted gupta's liberty commodities ltd.  in 2016 because they suspected some of its deals weren't legitimate, the people said.
when they learned about two years later that the bank was lending to his companies through a suite of investment funds, which eventually grew to $10 billion, they flagged their worries to leaders in compliance and the division that housed the loans, one of the people said.
the disclosure that credit suisse may have put clients at risk despite internal concerns over gupta's businesses adds a new twist to the debacle stemming from the march implosion of greensill capital, the finance firm at the center of the three-way relationship.
investigations, lawsuitsthe u. k.  serious fraud office is now investigating gupta's group of companies for suspected fraud, including in its financing deals with greensill, according to a may 14 statement.
credit suisse has sued to force gupta's liberty commodities into insolvency and has since shut the funds that made the loans and launched an internal investigation.
investors are staring at losses as the bank confronts embarrassing lawsuits.
"we are currently focusing our efforts on recovering our investors' money," will bowen, a spokesman for credit suisse in london, said in an emailed statement, adding that the bank's internal probe will focus on "all of the issues" linked to the funds.
"we are committed to learning the lessons and will share the relevant lessons learnt at the appropriate time.
"andrew mitchell, a spokesman for the gupta family group alliance, or gfg alliance, a collective of businesses linked to gupta including liberty commodities, denied any wrongdoing.
the greensill saga represents just one of the two disasters that rocked credit suisse in the first half of 2021.  since greensill began unraveling, the bank has announced a $5.
5 billion hit from the blowup at archegos capital management.
apologiesformer chairman urs rohner apologized to shareholders and his successor, antonio horta-osorio, who arrived at the end of april, has promised a sweeping strategy review.
chief executive officer thomas gottstein, who was head of the division that oversaw trade finance, wasn't aware of the internal concerns about gupta that had prompted the bank to cut him off, according to a person familiar with the matter.
employees at the trade-finance unit, which lends money for the buying and selling of commodities, cut ties with gupta in 2016 after becoming skeptical toward his liberty commodities, the people said.
they distrusted the documents the company provided, triggering doubts about its transactions, they said.
in one example reported by bloomberg, the company had presented another bank with what seemed to be duplicate shipping receipts.
credit suisse's commodity team had stopped working with gupta after identifying suspicious shipments while the bank's credit-structuring team lobbied against the greensill funds, the wall street journal reported in april.
a spokesman for gupta has denied any wrongdoing.
banking tiesliberty commodities pledged assets to credit suisse as security for borrowings in 2013 but by early 2016, all such commitments had been extinguished, indicating that the financing relationship had ceased, u. k.  companies house filings show.
and while gupta's company listed the swiss bank as one of its lenders in its 2014 annual report, it didn't in the following year's report, which is dated may 2016, according to the filings.
their counterparts at other banks, including macquarie group ltd.  and sberbank pjsc, halted trading with liberty commodities around the same time because of similar concerns; goldman sachs group inc.  also stopped in 2016, bloomberg has reported.
nevertheless, executives at credit suisse's asset-management division -- which creates investment products for clients and charges a fee for overseeing them -- began arranging a suite of funds focused on supply-chain finance in 2017.  the entities bought securitized loans packaged by greensill, a firm created by australian businessman lex greensill.
much of the debts were linked to gupta's businesses.
warningsofficials at the commodity trade-finance unit were concerned when they found out about the funds' links to gupta and took their fears to thomas grotzer, general counsel for the bank's swiss division.
they also warned luc mathys and lukas haas, the bankers who helped oversee the trades at the asset-management unit.
grotzer was promoted last month to interim global head of compliance at credit suisse.
he didn't respond to requests for comment.
mathys, head of fixed-income at the asset-management division, and haas, a portfolio manager, were put on temporary leave in march.
neither responded to requests for comment.
the bank pushed ahead with the funds and marketed them to investors as being made up of short-term debt secured on invoices, assets considered so safe that credit suisse gave the largest vehicle its lowest rating for risk.
yet part of the loans were linked to mere possible future revenues.
other parts of the bank continued working with gupta as well.
credit suisse's investment bankers were due to lead an initial public offering for liberty's u. s.  steel arm, which was ultimately pulled, according to a statement from the company.
gupta also announced that the swiss bank would finance his planned acquisition of thyssenkrupp ag's steel unit, which fell apart earlier this year.
credit suisse has so far recouped about $5.
9 billion of the $10 billion in these supply-chain funds, but it remains unclear how much will be returned ultimately to investors.
loans to gupta's businesses are among a batch of debts that are the "principal sources of valuation uncertainty," the bank said earlier this month.
liberty commodities's external legal advisors investigated "alleged rumors concerning the paperwork" it used in 2019, according to mitchell, the spokesman for gfg alliance.
they found no evidence to substantiate the rumors, nor was the company "ever subject to further complaints or proceedings," he said.
"lcl has ongoing banking relationships with separate financial institutions," mitchell said, referring to liberty commodities.
"the trade-finance market has been hugely challenging for all but the very largest commodities traders in recent years.
nevertheless, no financial institution has been left out of pocket as a result of lending money to lcl.
on the contrary, they have received substantial commercial returns.
"more stories like this are available on bloomberg.
comsubscribe now to stay ahead with the most trusted business news source.
©2021 bloomberg l. p. ,washington (reuters) -the federal aviation administration said friday that boeing had temporarily halted deliveries of 787 dreamliners as the agency waits for more data to determine if the planemaker's planned inspection method meets federal requirements.
"since the faa has not approved boeing's proposal, boeing chose to temporarily stop deliveries to its customers.
"however, shares of dell fell 1%, while those of hp dropped as much as 6%, after both companies warned the ongoing computer chip shortage could impact their ability to meet demand for laptops this year.
"the component supply situation remains constrained," dell chief financial officer thomas sweet said in post earnings call, adding that rising costs to procure these chips would hit its operating income in the current quarter by the low to mid-single digits and lead to slightly lower revenue on a sequential basis.
hp inc, which ranks second among global pc vendors according to idc data, said the shortages would limit its ability to supply personal computing devices and printers at least until the end of the year.
general electric co expects to burn less cash in the current quarter than it did a year earlier, continuing a year-on-year improvement in cash generation, chief financial officer carolina dybeck happe said on thursday.
the industrial conglomerate expects to post a similar level of improvement in cash flow this quarter as it did a quarter ago, dybeck happe said at a wolfe research transportation and industrials conference.
analysts surveyed by refinitiv, on average, expect the boston-based company to report a cash outflow of $746 million in the current quarter, smaller than an outflow of $2.
1 billion a year ago.
join our hybrid info session to hear from our sr.  executive director of the parttime mba weekday mode.
limited space available so secure yours today!the riksbank will partner with handelsbanken to test how the e-krona might work in the real world.
billionaire entrepreneur and newly converted defi fan mark cuban has invested in polygon (matic), a leading layer 2 ethereum scaling solution.
according to emails, he has confirmed the investment in polygon but didn't disclose the size or amount purchased.
(bloomberg) -- the manager of nigeria's biggest pension fund is teeing up millions in financing for the renewables sector but it's also embracing solar energy for the good of its own business.
standard bank group ltd. 's nigerian unit is aiming to run nearly half its offices on solar by 2022 to cut down on energy costs and dependence on diesel-powered generators in the west african nation, which suffers from acute power shortages and frequent blackouts.
stanbic ibtc holdings plc's shift to solar-powered systems will enable it to cut diesel cost for generators by about 20%, omolola fashesin, its head of sustainability, said in an emailed response to questions.
the fuel makes up a significant portion of spending on its banking premises that accounted for about 6.
3% of its operating expenses -- excluding staff costs -- in 2020. the bank has 175 business offices in africa's largest economy, all of which have to be supported by diesel-powered generators.
stanbic ibtc also plans to set aside $100 million for lending to local companies in the renewables sector over the next three years to help boost adoption of cleaner forms of energy, according to fashesin.
"the prospects for solar companies in nigeria are good but it does require a significant amount of capital," she said.
"there are opportunities for banks to partner with these companies to provide lending.
"energy goalsstanbic ibtc's parent, africa's largest bank by assets, agreed this month to set targets for reducing its exposure to fossil fuels after initially rejecting a demand from a group of fund managers to include a resolution on climate-change goals at its may 27 annual general meeting.
the greenhouse gas emissions associated with financial institutions' investing, lending and underwriting activities are more than 700 times higher, on average, than their direct emissions, according to a report published in april by climate nonprofit cdp.
lenders and businesses in africa's largest economy routinely run generators for their offices because of the unreliability of power supply from the national grid, which provides only about 4,500 megawatts of electricity for more than 200 million people.
stanbic ibtc is in talks with development financial institutions including international finance corp.  and us international development finance corp.  for on-lending facilities to nigerian firms investing in renewables, fashesin said.
nigeria has pledged to cut carbon emissions 20% by 2030 under the paris climate agreement as part of an effort to overcome its energy challenges.
while the government is encouraging private sector investments in renewables, it's also injecting 10% of the 2.
3 trillion naira ($5.
6 billion) intended to spur a recovery from the coronavirus pandemic toward providing solar power for households.
more stories like this are available on bloomberg.
comsubscribe now to stay ahead with the most trusted business news source.
©2021 bloomberg l. p. 1.
75%,18,60,!deutsche bank's multi-year overhaul is ahead of plan and remains its primary focus, chief executive christian sewing told shareholders on thursday, promising an era of more sustainable profit.
the bank's annual shareholder meeting, held online due to the coronavirus pandemic, took place in a more relaxed atmosphere than in recent years, a reflection of the lender's return to profit and rising share price.
three years into its restructuring, sewing said germany's largest bank wasn't over the finish line.
the activist investor said cryptocurrency would endure but not necessarily all the current digital.
(bloomberg) -- credit suisse group ag's top financial services banker is leaving the firm for jefferies financial group inc.  along with at least three colleagues, as departures accelerate at the scandal-plagued firm.
alejandro przygoda, global head of financial institutions, is joining jefferies along with carlos marque, fitzgerald woolcott and henry kong, according to people familiar with the matter, who asked to not be identified because the matter isn't public.
the departures follow a wave of exits from credit suisse in the wake of debacles involving archegos capital management and supply-chain finance firm greensill capital.
the financial-institutions group has seen at least four senior exits in recent weeks, with defections to barclays plc, bank of america corp.  and goldman sachs group inc. representatives for credit suisse and jefferies declined to comment.
the bankers didn't respond to requests for comment.
przygoda, who focuses on deals in the insurance sector, joined credit suisse in 2011 from greenhill & co.  prior to that he had worked at ubs group ag and donaldson, lufkin & jenrette, according to the financial industry regulatory authority.
more stories like this are available on bloomberg.
comsubscribe now to stay ahead with the most trusted business news source.
©2021 bloomberg l. p.
「」,!?
,!
(bloomberg) -- star investor cathie wood has a message of reassurance for bitcoin investors amid the din of ever harsher regulatory rhetoric: officials won't be able to make the largest cryptocurrency go away.
tough talk against digital tokens from china and calls for greater scrutiny in europe and the u. s.  have contributed to a slump in bitcoin, but wood said the virtual currency is "already on its way and it'll be impossible to shut it down.
"regulators "will be a little more friendly over time" toward cryptocurrencies out of fear of missing out on the innovation provided by the sector, wood said at the consensus 2021 conference organized by coindesk.
read more: cathie wood's bad spring is a blip when future is so magnificentthe most high-profile recent broadside came from china.
a push to rein in cryptocurrency mining there was partly triggered by concern over a surge in illicit coal extraction to deliver the power needed by the server farms underpinning bitcoin.
billionaire elon musk also highlighted environmental risks in suspending bitcoin payments at tesla inc. wood, founder of ark investment management llc, said that the focus on green factors likely led to a pause in institutional buying of bitcoin.
she has previously said she expects the token to surge longer term.
bitcoin's questionable environmental profile has eroded the argument that the token is bound to lure more mainstream investment, whether as an online store of value akin to digital bullion or for more speculative purposes.
musk has backed an effort to shine a light on energy consumption by north american miners, including planned renewable use.
but it will take years for many of the largest miners to recalibrate where they source their energy.
"half of the solution is understanding the problem," wood said.
"this auditing of what miners, certainly in north america, are willing to do around how much of their electricity usage is generated by renewables is going to bring that topic into stark relief, and will encourage an acceleration in the adoption of renewables beyond which otherwise would have taken the place.
"ark investment management published a report last month saying cryptocurrency mining can drive investment in solar power and make more renewable energy available to the grid.
capital-gains taxon the stock market outlook, wood said concerns about higher u. s.  capital-gains taxes had hurt "high-volatility, high-multiple stocks," but added those fears have eased amid increased chances of gridlock in washington.
ark's funds have faced a tough time of late as a wave of selling swept across former market darlings in the technology sector amid a switch to less richly valued segments of the equity market.
the firm's flagship ark innovation etf has slumped about 28% from its february peak.
bitcoin was trading around the $38,000 level as of 12:41 p. m.  in tokyo, down some 40% from a record in mid-april.
(updates with more from wood from the eighth paragraph.
)more stories like this are available on bloomberg.
comsubscribe now to stay ahead with the most trusted business news source.
©2021 bloomberg l. p. this year china's government has been gradually ramping up scrutiny of its sprawling oil industry, reinforcing its authority with new taxes on refined products while investigating crude imports by state energy giants and independent refiners.
last tuesday, the country's top economic planning agency gave five state-owned companies just two days to report on their historic use of imported oil, part of a broader effort by the world's largest oil importer to control inbound shipments as domestic supplies swell.
china is the world's largest crude oil importer and the no.
2 consumer after the united states.
(bloomberg) -- hedge funds often measure their investments in minutes, not decades; but for anchorage capital group, its long-held stake in metro-goldwyn-mayer studios inc.  is proving that patience can also be profitable.
the new york-based money manager stands to make roughly $2 billion on its investment in the film and tv producer, one that began almost 11 years ago with mgm in bankruptcy court.
amazon.
com inc.  agreed to buy the company for $8.
45 billion wednesday, a price that includes just under $2 billion in debt.
the deal is in many ways a vindication for kevin ulrich, the former goldman sachs group inc.  trader who co-founded anchorage in 2003 and was part of a group of distressed debt investors that took control of mgm as it went through the restructuring process.
in recent years the stake looked to be an albatross for the fund, one that came with significant drama in its own right.
ulrich brought in and later fired a high-profile chief executive officer, resisted efforts by activist investor carl icahn to take control, and held out for a bigger payday after years of considering various exit strategies.
by selling now, as demand for media content from entertainment and technology companies alike is booming, he's proving his long-held faith in the investment was justified.
"there was a lot of maneuvering, a lot of financial engineering," said steven azarbad, chief investment officer at new york's maglan capital, an mgm investor who sold his shares four years ago.
"but they've done great.
"a representative for anchorage declined to comment.
when ulrich first invested in mgm, he was new to hollywood.
he helped pick gary barber, a south african-born producer of films such as "ace ventura: pet detective" as chief executive officer of the storied but debt-laden studio.
barber brought to the table a shrewd business sense, and connections into a world ulrich long admired from afar.
barber shepherded mgm's development of "the hobbit" franchise, a co-production with warner bros. , that became a global smash hit.
he helmed the release of the james bond film, "skyfall," which generated over $1 billion at the box office, and he revived the studio's work in television.
barber also brokered a deal to bring on tv super producer mark burnett, which gave mgm access to reality show hits like "survivor" and "the apprentice," but would ultimately become personally troublesome.
in 2012 the company bought back icahn's stock for $590 million.
it also filed paperwork for a possible public offering of shares, and considered other options, such as a sale.
as barber boosted mgm's film and tv pipeline, ulrich was increasingly entranced by the allure of hollywood.
he became a regular at movie premieres in los angeles and new york, and frequented industry parties in the hamptons and elsewhere.
he became active in creative decisions after becoming chair of mgm's board -- somewhat unusual for a non-executive lacking hollywood experience -- even getting involved with business granularities like casting.
growing riftbut over the following years a rift began to open up between barber and ulrich.
when it was time to renew barber's contract in 2017, ulrich conducted an extensive search for a new ceo.
when it ended, he ultimately chose to sign barber to a new five-year deal.
yet around the same time, the pair split on whether to sell the company, with ulrich wanting to hang on to the studio and barber saying it was time to find a buyer.
the company would hold buyout talks with apple inc.  as well as chinese investors that would ultimately prove fruitless.
only months after renewing barber's deal, ulrich fired him.
the shock departure meant the company had to pay barber for five years of salary and buy out his equity, a package totaling $260 million.
in the three years since barber left, ulrich hasn't replaced him, instead operating an "office of the chief executive officer," comprised of various people that each have their personal vision for mgm.
barber declined to comment via his spokesperson.
bounce backafter the initial period of success following the restructuring, the gains became harder to come by, as they did in anchorage's overall credit-focused business.
two senior managers left the firm in january 2020, and another in november.
anchorage's flagship strategy, with about $8.
5 billion under management, returned just 0.
6% in 2018, 1.
5% in 2019 and 4.
4% in 2020, according to people familiar with the matter.
in december, mgm hired investment bankers for a potential sale.
mgm only released one film in theaters in 2020.  its biggest potential hit, the latest bond film, "no time to die," was pushed from last year to this october as a result of the pandemic.
yet the value of mgm's library rose as everyone from media companies to technology giants have sought to build video streaming platforms that can compete with industry leader netflix inc.  earnings jumped 48% last year, to about $307 million, even as sales declined.
anchorage holds a roughly 30% stake in mgm, worth about $2.
5 billion in the sale, said people with knowledge of the matter.
anchorage invested around $500 million in the company more than a decade ago.
including the mgm stake, anchorage's flagship fund is up 18% this year, the people added.
the fund has gained about 8% in 2021 not counting the studio.
more stories like this are available on bloomberg.
comsubscribe now to stay ahead with the most trusted business news source.
©2021 bloomberg l. p. ,.
!the draft rules, which will be open for public comment until june 1, could set a precedent for other bitcoin mining hubs in china.
(bloomberg) -- china is taking another step to shape up state firms with a new fund aimed at reforming a sector that has emerged as the nation's biggest source of credit risk.
china reform holdings corp. , a state-run investment firm, and a group of local state asset regulators have launched a suite of equity investment funds totaling 70 billion yuan ($11 billion) to help improve state-owned enterprises' corporate governance and turn them more market oriented, the company said in a statement thursday.
the announcement marks the latest move by beijing to make the country's cumbersome and inefficient soes, especially those at the local level, more commercially viable and financially healthier.
a wave of bond defaults by state-linked firms since late last year and the ongoing debt saga at china huarong asset management co. , a top bad-loan manager, have challenged long-held assumptions of government support for such firms.
the first batch of the newly established funds will total 35 billion yuan, which will be deployed in six cities including shanghai, shenzhen, shenyang, hangzhou, xi'an, and qingdao, said the statement, without offering further details about the specific uses of the funding.
china's state asset regulator, including its local branches, oversees the vast majority of the nation's soes, except for financial firms including banks and bad-loan managers such as huarong that are overseen by financial regulators.
china's state-linked borrowers, which have more than $4 trillion in outstanding onshore bonds, are facing increased scrutiny.
including its silence over huarong's debt woes, beijing is sending a clear signal that poorly run soes won't be automatically bailed out as president xi jinping seeks to reduce moral hazard in the country's financial markets.
deepening concern about the level of backing for state firms at the local level has in part caused new debt sales to plunge in financially weaker provinces such as henan and shanxi this year.
more stories like this are available on bloomberg.
comsubscribe now to stay ahead with the most trusted business news source.
©2021 bloomberg l. p. (bloomberg) -- china is clamping down on some corn imports amid concern that overseas purchases have spiraled out of control, prompting several feed mills to cancel their u. s.  cargoes.
chinese customs authorities are restricting imports into free trade zones, which aren't counted toward an official annual purchase quota, according to people with knowledge of the matter.
total u. s.  corn cancellations are estimated to be less than 1 million tons, said two of the people, who asked not to be identified as the matter is private.
the increased scrutiny by beijing over its corn imports comes as the broader market focuses on whether the country will continue its heightened purchases of raw materials from grains to metals to fossil fuels.
prices across a variety of products have soared this year partly because of chinese demand, raising import costs and sparking fears over inflation in the asian nation.
corn futures in chicago fell as much as 2% before erasing losses as traders determined the scrapped purchases aren't big enough to alter an already tight supply situation.
some market watchers claim china, which is forecast to import a record amount of corn this year, is trying to get a better deal after prices recently surged above $7 a bushel for the first time since 2013.
"china is playing a negotiating game," said david martin, founder of martin fund management in new york.
china's crackdown on corn purchases is targeted at businesses that have set up blending facilities in the free trade zones, according to the people familiar with the matter.
these facilities allow firms to mix the imported corn with other raw materials to produce livestock feed that enable them to profit from zero-tariff imports, the people said.
calls to chinese customs outside business hours went unanswered.
illinois corn farmer matt bennett, a co-founder of commodities brokerage and consulting firm agmarket.
net, noted that china has a pattern of crop-import cancellations only to start "buying the daylights out of stuff.
"the canceled shipments are a small amount compared to more than 20 million tons of american corn that china has purchased this season.
the asian nation has been a key source of demand for the grain to feed its recovering hog herd, helping to push prices to multiyear highs.
imports from the u. s.  have soared as beijing also seeks to fulfill its commitments for the "phase one" trade deal signed with the u. s.  in january 2020. the latest move by china "is likely to have only a very small impact on china's compliance with the overall purchase commitments on the phase one agreement," said chad bown, an expert at the pro-trade peterson institute for international economics in washington.
"corn is just too small a portion of the overall deal.
"corn quotaschina allocates annual corn import quotas to state and private firms.
state-owned cofco corp.  may at times receive an allowance to buy an additional amount that it resells domestically to private mills or to replenish state reserves.
the quotas for 2021 are set at 7.
2 million tons.
imports outside the quota are possible, but may incur tariffs of up to 65% of the purchase price.
shipments into bonded zones are exempt from duties.
the proliferation of businesses that are shipping corn into bonded zones and blending them for animal feed has alarmed authorities, who are seeking to control imports and maintain the quality of feed products.
last month, shandong province shut down a feed producer located at a local bonded zone after its product was found to have fallen short of protein requirements.
the plant mainly blended corn with a low amount of distillers dried grains, or ddgs, said one of the people.
all the cancellations will be of old u. s.  corn crop from the 2020-21 marketing year, the people said.
more than 15 million tons of american corn have been purchased for state stockpiles from old and new crops, two of the people said.
(corrects spelling of bown's name in 10th paragraph in story published may 26.
)more stories like this are available on bloomberg.
comsubscribe now to stay ahead with the most trusted business news source.
©2021 bloomberg l. p.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore the interest rates that central provident fund (cpf) members can earn on their various accounts will remain unchanged in the third quarter of 2021, the housing board and cpf board said on friday (may 28).
from july to september 2021, cpf members below 55 years old will continue to earn interest rates of up to 3.
5 per cent a year on their ordinary account, and up to 5 per cent a year on their special and medisave accounts.
these interest rates include the extra 1 per cent interest on the first $60,000 of their combined balances, capped at $20,000 for the ordinary account.
cpf members aged 55 and above will continue earning up to 6 per cent interest a year on their combined balances.
this includes the extra 2 per cent interest on the first $30,000 of their combined balances, capped at $20,000 for the ordinary account, and an extra 1 per cent on the next $30,000.
the extra interest paid to cpf members is part of the government's efforts to enhance the retirement savings of cpf members.
the extra interest on the ordinary account will go into members' special account or retirement account to enhance their retirement savings.
for cpf members above 55 years old and participating in the cpf life scheme, which provides a lifelong monthly payout that begins when the member turns 65 years old, the extra interest will still be earned on their combined balances, which include the savings used for cpf life.
from july to september 2021, the floor rate of 2.
5 per cent interest a year earned on the ordinary account will be maintained, as will the 4 per cent floor rate for the special and medisave accounts.
the 4 per cent floor rate on the retirement account will remain unchanged for the rest of the year, as announced on sept 25 last year.
the concessionary interest rate for hdb housing loans, which is pegged at 0.
1 per cent above the ordinary account interest rate, will remain unchanged at 2.
6 per cent a year.
cpf members can visit the cpf website or call the cpf call centre on 1800-227-1188 if they have inquiries.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
five million weary melbourne residents were put back under lockdown on friday, straining local resolve and testing australia's "zero-covid" strategy of smothering outbreaks however small.
as authorities said a cluster of positive cases had grown to 39, streets in australia's second city emptied out for the fourth time since the pandemic began.
"it's just very difficult," resident gavin catt told afp.
"this lockdown is affecting us.
many families and friends can't work.
"melbournians have been ordered to stay at home for seven days to stall transmission and buy the authorities time to investigate how the virus again jumped from hotel quarantine into the community.
the outbreak is believed to have begun when a traveller infected with the indian variant returned to australia, but victoria's acting state premier james merlino called for military help with the investigation.
around 15,000 close contacts have been identified and the list of venues visited by confirmed cases had grown to 130. merlino on thursday blamed sluggish vaccine rollout and hotel quarantine failures for the latest outbreak.
"if we had an alternative to hotel quarantine for this particular variant of concern, we would not be here today," he said.
it is believed to be the 17th time in six months that the virus has leaked out of makeshift hotel quarantine facilities, which are now facing tough scrutiny.
fingers are also being pointed at australia's conservative federal government for the slow rate of vaccinations, which threatens to reverse the country's early virus success.
australia has recorded 30,000 covid-19 cases since the pandemic began -- with a large portion in hotel quarantine -- in a country of 25 million people.
but only two percent of australians have so far been fully vaccinated.
"i'm from new york originally so i feel like we've had a really good go of it here in australia in terms of how many people have gotten sick," said david gonzalez.
"so i guess i'm willing to accept a bit of a slow rollout but if these things happen more often, they just have to get more vaccines in the country.
"prime minister scott morrison has defended his government's handling of the crisis saying hotel quarantine facilities were "99.
99 percent effective.
"but critics countered that a single infection leaking from a quarantine system that has processed thousands of travellers was sufficient to shut down an entire state, and the country's second-biggest city.
in recent months, australians had largely been enjoying few restrictions after the country successfully contained the spread of coronavirus.
but outbreaks in taiwan and japan have underscored how initial success containing the virus can quickly be eroded without widespread vaccination.
australia is currently vaccinating around 75,000 people each day.
in a note to clients on friday, the national australian bank warned that it is "clear that virus outbreaks from hotel quarantine remain a significant risk for australia until a high degree of vaccine penetration is reached".
"on the current pace, australia will not reach a level of vaccination approaching herd immunity (estimates suggest that is around 70% or higher) by the end of the year.
"bur-arb/dm/jaha malaysian woman who entered singapore to carry out illegal cosmetic procedures in 2019 was on friday (28 may) jailed for 10 weeks and fined $5,500.
in a wooded corner of estonia 120 kilometres (75 miles) from the russian border, some 7,000 soldiers are taking part in a nato battleground exercise.
$6,600「」,$100「」find out who stuck with their day jobs and who didn't.
this article, 7 celebrities who married into malaysian royalty, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
the grave keeps getting deeper for tajuddin abdul rahman.
this article, after disastrous press conference, ex-prasarana chairman probed for alleged corruption, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
one of the first robo-advisors in the now crowded space, stashaway is a name well-known by many.
here's what you can expect when you invest your cash or srs funds with stashaway.
as one of the early players in the robo-advisory space in singapore, stashaway [.
.
. ]
the post stashaway review: goal-getting investments through etfs appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
smart,5%!$1,600,!the ministry of health (moh) on friday (27 may) confirmed 30 new covid-19 cases in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 61,970. hdb flat rentals make up a large part of singapore's property market—according to hdb, there are about 60,000 flats currently being rented out.
we examined rental trends across different hdb estates and here's what we found.
aye mar sits with her seven children in their yangon kitchen and worries whether their meal of rice and stringy vegetables -- all she can afford in coup-stricken myanmar -- will satisfy their hunger.
「axa」:,6!two sleek new roads vanish into mountain tunnels high above a sleepy montenegrin village, the unlikely endpoint of a billion-dollar project bankrolled by china that is threatening to derail the tiny country's economy.
an international firefighting effort to put out a huge blaze on a container ship off sri lanka's coast will likely take days, the country's navy chief said thursday, amid mounting fears of a major oil leak.
many of the syrian fighters deployed, sometimes forcibly, in foreign conflict theatres such as libya and nagorno-karabakh are robbed of their wages, said a report released thursday.
《!》ut,!the package will assist workers and companies hit by the ongoing phase 2 (heightened alert).
shares in the parent company of hong kong's pro-democracy apple daily newspaper quadrupled on thursday as trading in them resumed following an eight-day suspension.
bytedance founder zhang yiming, the brains behind tiktok, said he preferred "daydreaming" as he stepped down as head of his own firm last week.
but his departure comes as several of china's once-lauded tech entrepreneurs step aside under increasing scrutiny from a government concerned about their growing power and influence.
!marla40,.
$50,.
roland garros has been a happy hunting ground for many of the greatest grand slam champions, but rising stars naomi osaka and daniil medvedev are hoping to avoid joining the list of tennis' big names who could never conquer the parisian clay.
investors rejected the responses of us oil giants to climate change wednesday, installing activist board members at exxonmobil and directing chevron to deepen emissions cuts.
australia closed its embassy in afghanistan on friday, highlighting security fears for foreign missions and their local workers as us-led troops pull out of the war-torn country.
51930megag,&3!
kanu,,bt21!8.
5~hong kong's security chief has warned bankers for jailed media tycoon jimmy lai chee-ying that dealing with his frozen accounts could land them in prison for up to seven years.
when asked whether his move would undermine the reputation of the city as a global financial hub, john lee ka-chiu said on thursday he was following the national security law laid down by beijing last summer that banned acts of subversion, secession, terrorism and collusion with foreign forces.
"i am exercising the power because lai has been charged with two offences of collusion with other countries or external forces to endanger national security," he said.
"it is my duty to specify in my notice to the relevant parties what will be the consequences if they fail to comply with my direction.
"do you have questions about the biggest topics and trends from around the world?
get the answers with scmp knowledge, our new platform of curated content with explainers, faqs, analyses and infographics brought to you by our award-winning team.
the security bureau froze nearly hk$500 million (us$64 million) of lai's assets earlier this month, including his 71 per cent stake in next digital, which publishes the apple daily tabloid, as well as the local bank accounts of three other companies he owns.
the move marked the first time authorities had invoked new powers to freeze or take control of assets of a listed company that could be related to the commission of a national security crime.
but lee said the warning contained in letters sent to an unspecified number of banks after the freezing was only related to assets under suspicion and people carrying out normal business should have nothing to worry about.
lai has been accused of collusion with a foreign country and was also charged with two counts of conspiracy last month.
he is currently serving 14 months in prison for taking part in unauthorised assemblies connected to the anti-government protests of 2019.  jimmy lai asset freeze nothing to do with press freedom, says security chief a spokesman of the hong kong monetary authority, which is responsible for maintaining the city's status as a financial centre, said it would not comment on cases under investigation by police.
but he pointed to the long history that banks had in cooperating with law enforcement agencies in criminal investigations, including freezing and confiscating funds and property under relevant laws, including the national security law.
next digital resumed trading after a 10-day suspension following the freezing of lai's assets and its share price surged 330 per cent from the hk$0.
19 (us$0.
02) at opening to as high as hk$0.
80 (us$0.
10), before falling to hk$0.
28 (us$0.
04) at the close of market.
next digital's management issued a statement on wednesday saying its unaudited bank and cash balances as of march 31 stood at hk$521.
4 million (us$67 million) and its working capital would last a minimum of 18 months from april 1, even without additional funding from lai.
it also said the asset freeze had no impact on a standing shareholder's loan lai had provided to the company and its subsidiaries.
but that assessment was questioned by former city leader leung chun-ying who has been a staunch critic of apple daily but also revealed that he was a minority stakeholder in the company.
leung put the reserves closer to hk$100 million, after subtracting outstanding bank loans totalling hk$93.
6 million, and other liabilities and payables.
"will the bank call the loans?
will suppliers continue to offer credit terms?"
he said on his facebook page.
noting the statement was issued by the board, leung questioned why it had not made its own assessment during the trading suspension, rather than relying on the management's.
ex-hong kong leader has government on the defensive.
is he planning a comeback?
"who is the person in charge of the management?
this is the chief executive officer.
and who is the chief executive officer?
he is cheung kim-hung," he wrote.
the former leader – who is also a vice-chairman of china's top political advisory body – had already lashed out at cheung before next digital's announcement, revealing on wednesday that he had appointed a lawyer to file a formal complaint with law enforcement against the ceo for making "negligent, irresponsible and intentionally misleading" remarks.
leung disputed cheung's suggestion the company's operations and finances would not be affected by the freezing of lai's assets, and demanded a thorough investigation by authorities.
asked about the criticisms, cheung declined to comment.
additional reporting by jeffie lammore from south china morning post:hong kong authorities freeze nearly hk$500 million in assets belonging to media tycoon jimmy laifuture of hong kong's apple daily is on the line after founder jimmy lai's assets are frozen under national security lawthis article national security law: jimmy lai's hong kong bankers warned that handling assets could land them in jail first appeared on south china morning postfor the latest news from the south china morning post download our mobile app.
copyright 2021. the trial of an australian academic detained for more than two years in china on espionage charges began behind closed doors on thursday, with canberra voicing deep concerns over a lack of transparency after its ambassador was denied access.
laliga santander's official 2020-21 season awards have rewarded three stand-out individual performances and achievements.
tokyo: the head of a japanese doctors' union warned on thursday (may 25) that holding the olympic games in tokyo this summer, with tens of thousands of people from around the world, could lead to the emergence of an "olympic" strain of the coronavirus.
japan has pledged to hold a "safe and secure" 2020 olympics in tokyo after a year-long postponement but it is struggling to contain a fourth wave of infections and preparing to extend a state of emergency in much of the country.
japanese officials, olympics organisers and the international olympic committee (ioc) have allvowed the games will go ahead, albeit under strict virus-prevention measures.
foreign spectators have been banned and a decision on domestic ones is expected next month.
but even with those steps, worries remain about the influx of athletes and officials into japan, where a vaccination drive remains glacially slow, with just over 5 per cent of the population having had a shot.
with people from more than 200 nations and territories set to arrive, the games, due to begin in eight weeks, pose a danger, said naoto ueyama, head of the japan doctors union.
"all of the different mutant strains of the virus which exist in different places will be concentrated and gathering here in tokyo.
we cannot deny the possibility of even a new strain of the virus potentially emerging," he told a news conference.
"if such a situation were to arise, it could even mean a tokyo olympic strain of the virus being named in this way, which would be a huge tragedy and something which would be the target of criticism, even for 100 years.
"but kenji shibuya, director of the institute of population health at king's college, london, who has recently been helping the vaccination campaign in japan, played down dangers specific to the games.
"mutation takes place when virus stays in immunocompromised or partially immunised people for a long period of time," shibuya said.
"so the current situation in japan is more dangerous than (during) the tokyo games, in my opinion.
"state of emergencythe asahi shimbun, an official partner of the tokyo olympics, carried an editorial on wednesdayurging the games be cancelled, but former ioc vice president dick pound said later in the day the sports extravaganza should and would go ahead.
the government is currently preparing to extend a state of emergency across much of the nation originally set to be lifted on may 31, most likely well into june, officials have said just weeks before the games are set to open on jul 23. but ioc member john coates has said the olympics could be held even under a state of emergency, an opinion ueyama said was infuriating.
"in regards to these statements, the people of japan are indeed holding great anger towards this, and this is even more the case for healthcare and medical professionals," ueyama said.
earlier this week, theunited states advised against travel to japan, but olympics organisers have said this will not affect the games.
the white house on wednesday said it had been assured by japan's government that it will keep in close contact about concerns over the olympics.
in a sign of how uncertain the situation remains, however, australia's major sports leagues and olympic hopefuls were left scrambling to make contingency plans after authorities announced a seven-day lockdown in the southern state of victoria to contain a covid-19 outbreak in melbourne.
chiba prefecture, which borders tokyo, announced on thursday that it was cancelling its stretch of the olympic torch relay out of safety concerns, becoming the latest area to scale back events.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore a fresh wave of covid-19 infections is sweeping the globe, with several countries in the region, including malaysia, indonesia and the philippines getting badly hit.
singapore has not been spared.
in the fortnight till may 26, it has seen between 19 and 38 new community cases diagnosed each day compared with the one to 16 cases a day in the previous fortnight in spite of tighter safety measures.
to some, this evokes memories of the days leading up to the circuit breaker last year, when case numbers were rising.
but there are key differences.
singapore may be battling more infectious variants of the virus this time around, but it appears to have a firmer grip on the situation.
the number of new community cases is currently lower than the roughly 40-60 in early april last year, just before the circuit breaker was implemented.
this is despite the fact that all four of the more easily transmissible variants of concern (vocs) have been found here, with several of the recent clusters caused by the spread of the b1617 variant that is ravaging india.
there are about 240 people requiring hospital care today, among whom 18 are on oxygen and two need intensive care.
but singapore has so far evaded the fate of countries that faced second waves of infection far more devastating than the first.
globally, there are more new daily cases this year than last more than half a million people are infected each day largely due to the high rate of transmission in india.
places like brazil and argentina continue to report high numbers.
professor leo yee sin, executive director of the national centre for infectious diseases, said: "the strain that is prevalent in many of the covid-19 cases (in singapore) in recent weeks is the b16172 variant.
"this has a "higher amount of virus excreted from respiratory secretion compared with the parent strain", she added, and "can amplify in all forms of transmission routes", such as surfaces, through direct contact, droplet and aerosol transmission.
yet experts the straits times spoke to were generally optimistic.
dr asok kurup, who chairs the academy of medicine's chapter of infectious disease physicians, said: "i was initially all for a circuit breaker, but it seems that the daily numbers are pretty stable and manageable.
"professor dale fisher, a senior infectious diseases consultant at the national university hospital (nuh), said: "the curve is quite flat and, importantly, what we aren't seeing is exponential growth.
"prof fisher said singapore can also take comfort that a third of the population has had at least one dose of the vaccine.
he said singapore is "starting to reap the benefits" of lower transmissions, since people who have been vaccinated, even with just one dose, are less likely to spread the virus.
and should they get infected, the disease is less severe for them.
the hospitals have not been overwhelmed and have been able to cope.
prof fisher said that while the mrna vaccines may be less effective against the vocs, the drop in efficacy is only about 5-10 per cent which means "they are still really good".
associate professor hsu liyang of the nus saw swee hock school of public health feels singapore is in a stronger position than it was last year.
"today, we understand far more about the virus than we did before.
.
.
we know how to limit its spread and have treatment options backed by clinical trials.
we have safe and effective vaccines.
.
.
and the capacity to ramp up testing and containment facilities," he said.
his colleague at the school, associate professor alex cook, fully agreed: "we hold a strong hand.
"the safe management measures to control spread are generally very effective, adherence is good, testing capacity is high, vaccination roll-out is proceeding apace, the border has been made even more secure.
"he said the major risk is the "seemingly more transmissible variants", which is why the safety measures "are not quite as effective as they were last year".
prof cook added that since the immunity levels among migrant workers is much higher today, "we are much less likely to see the explosive dorm outbreaks we did a year ago".
last year, covid-19 spread like wildfire among dormitory residents, shooting up very quickly to hit more than 1,000 cases a day by mid-april, putting great stress on the healthcare system.
cases in the dormitories still account for more than 90 per cent of all local cases.
singapore also has about 4,600 imported cases, bringing the total number here to close to 62,000. but there have been only a handful of cases among dormitory residents in the past fortnight.
and yet, it could be a long time before life returns to normal.
countries around the world have been hoping to acquire herd immunity through a population vaccination programme as the answer to the pandemic.
the idea is that those who are vaccinated would break the chain of transmission, hence reducing the spread of the disease.
the number touted for herd immunity has gone up from getting 50 per cent of the population vaccinated when the pandemic was declared, to 60- 80 per cent today.
herd immunity depends on a number of factors.
the r0, or transmission rate, is of course important.
at the start of the pandemic, one person was thought to be transmitting the disease to two others so if half the population was immune, the spread would fall to one person infecting just one other.
in other words, the number of infections would remain flat.
but the vocs are said to be more easily transmitted.
this means that a larger proportion of the population needs to be immune to spreading the virus.
then, the level of protection given by the vaccine, or prior infection, also influences the transmission rate.
the lower the protection rate, the higher the percentage of population that has to be vaccinated to achieve herd immunity.
"i am not sure that herd immunity is a useful concept here," said prof fisher.
"the endpoint will be ongoing transmission where only the unvaccinated get sick. "
so 'herd immunity' will not protect people who do not have immunity either from a previous infection or through vaccination.
even with herd immunity, people will get infected, though the country will not see an explosion of cases.
professor ooi eng eong, of the duke-nus medical school's emerging infectious diseases programme, said: "i don't think we will get rid of covid-19, but the number of cases would not overwhelm our healthcare system to result in excessive number of covid-19-related deaths.
"but he is optimistic that vaccines will restore most of what life was before 2020, though he added: "we will, however, have to develop an active surveillance system for covid-19 cases even when vaccinated, to be proactive in dealing with potential vaccine-escape mutants if they do arise.
"prof fisher agreed that once people here are vaccinated, covid-19 can be treated as a mild disease.
this could even happen by the end of this year, he said.
"that's what the vaccine does reduces transmission and makes the disease mild.
we could remove quarantine as an entry requirement to singapore but it does require a very high vaccine uptake here.
"quarantine may still be required for visitors coming from places with high infection rates.
however, dr kurup said: "no i don't see this yet as we have not even climbed the peak.
"he said travel will only be possible when large numbers of people everywhere get vaccinated, and this is difficult to achieve with inequitable access.
prof cook too said that carefree travel may be some way off, given the delays in getting vaccines to low- and middle-income countries.
"but opportunities for some forms of travel may become more possible once vaccination rates have expanded sufficiently.
"so while everyone here might chafe at the current restrictions on movement and socialising, there appears to be a light at the end of tunnel for those who are vaccinated.
unfortunately, some people, because of their age or medical conditions, cannot be vaccinated at least with the current vaccines available.
prof leo said while vaccination and contact tracing are important tools to prevent or slow down transmission, it is more important that people follow safety measures and see a doctor when sick, since the virus "is elusive in nature".
rigorous precautions by everyone may be the only way to keep it in check.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
two pupils from concord primary school in choa chu kang and a pastor from grace assembly of god church were among the 26 new covid-19 cases announced by the ministry of heath (moh) last night.
the first pupil is an 11-year-old boy who developed a cough last saturday but did not report his symptoms, while the second is a six-year-old girl who developed flu-like symptoms on monday.
both pupils were under quarantine from last friday and had last gone to school on may 17, said moh.
they are family members of a previous case who is part of the jem and westgate cluster.
the pastor is a 30-year-old singapore permanent resident who had visited jem on may 11. she is asymptomatic and her infection was detected when she was tested for covid-19 on monday as part of surveillance testing operations for those who had visited jem and westgate.
her test came back positive on tuesday.
grace assembly of god church was one of the first covid-19 clusters formed last year.
it was not clear which of the church's two branches she is from.
the jem and westgate cluster now has 60 people and is the second-largest active cluster here.
a new cluster was also formed after two cases were linked to a 15-year-old westwood secondary school student.
the singaporean was confirmed to be infected on monday and was included in moh's tuesday figures.
two more cases were added to the mcdonald's delivery riders cluster.
one is a 41-year-old permanent resident who works as a receptionist at wanderloft hostel and is also a part-time waitress at the collins restaurant outlet at nex mall.
as she was a close contact of a previous case, she was placed under quarantine on sunday.
she developed a fever and cough on tuesday, and tested positive on the same day.
the second case is a 58-year-old singaporean who works as a kitchen staff and service crew at the mcdonald's outlet at pasir ris elias community club.
she was last at work on may 19.  she is asymptomatic and was tested last friday as part of arrangements by her employer.
her test result came back positive on tuesday.
there are now 15 cases linked to this cluster.
one more migrant worker from the harvest @ woodlands dormitory tested positive, expanding the cluster to five people.
other cases announced yesterday include a 25-year-old cleaner who works at changi business park, a two-year-old pupil at my first skool at 331 sembawang close, and a 20-year-old student at the national university of singapore who works part-time at poke theory in novena.
there were also two imported cases who had been placed on stay-home notice.
new cases: 26in community: 23imported: 2 (1 work permit holder, 1 short-term visit pass holder)in dormitories: 1new community cases in the past week: 165 (30 unlinked cases)active cases: 524in hospitals: 242 (2 in icu)in community facilities: 282deaths: 32patients with covid-19 who died of other causes: 15total discharged: 61,345discharged yesterday: 31total cases: 61,916join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore: when sam (not his real name) received a phone call from someone claiming to be from dbs, nothing could have prepared him for the strange twist of events that would unfold.
the caller said that his dbs card "was linked to a serious financial issue and that they would transfer me to police officers in beijing to help resolve the issue", said the 21-year-old undergraduate from china who is studying in singapore.
unconvinced, sam hung up after his call was transferred.
"i didn't believe it .
.
.
but then they called me again using a number that, when i googled, showed that it was from a beijing police department," he said.
"they video-called me wearing police attire and their background looked like a police station," sam told reporters on may 23 (sunday).
the men then told sam that he owed s$10,000, reassuring him that they would investigate and help get his money back.
they kept in touch with sam through phone calls and whatsapp messages, occasionally video-calling him.
"gradually, i started believing them," said sam.
then things suddenly took a dramatic turn.
the same men allegedly told sam that he was involved in a serious financial crime by a syndicate.
they told him to cut off contact with his family and friends, and live somewhere else for a few days while they investigated, he added.
sam left his house and checked into a hotel along upper serangoon road after receiving a parcel containing s$500, a mobile phone and a hotel key card.
the scammers then told him to pose in front of a video call while gagged and blindfolded.
this was for an "x-ray" photo that would be used for comparison with "investigation findings" in china, the scammers had allegedly said.
by this time his parents, who are based in china, felt like something was wrong.
"we couldn't contact him on may 15 and thought that he should be back the next day," sam's father told reporters in the same interview.
when sam did not return home on may 16, they filed a missing person report with the singapore police force (spf).
unaware of the missing person's report, sam moved out of the hotel and into a housing board flat in clementi a few days later under the instructions of the men who called him.
there, he met three people  a 61-year-old man, his wife and their tenant.
"the first time i met him, (the 61-year-old man) asked me whether i was sent here by chinese police officers," said sam.
"and so, i believed him," he added.
sam said he spent his time watching tv shows, ordering food and sometimes, even playing cards with the man's wife.
sam's father said that they were mentally preparing themselves for a few outcomes – "an accident, a scam or a kidnap".
on may 20 at around 7am, sam's parents received a call with the video of sam blindfolded and gagged.
the sender demanded his parents pay six million yuan (about s$1.
24 million) in ransom.
the video message, seen by cna, carried an audio message.
a man's voice could be heard, saying in mandarin, "kid, don't be scared, i won't hurt you.
listen up, as long as your parents pay up you don't have to worry about anything else.
eventually, we will release you, but this is also up to your parents.
""now we know it is fake, but .
.
.
it was scary," said sam's father, adding that he contacted spf and the chinese consulate in singapore.
police conducted investigations and eventually found sam a few hours later.
they explained to him that he had been a victim of a scam.
two men involved in scam suspected to be victims themselvesthe police arrested the 33-year-old man, who had handed the phone and money to sam, for his alleged involvement in the china official impersonation scam, said spf in a news release on wednesday.
the owner of the hdb flat, the 61-year-old man, is currently under investigation.
preliminary investigations revealed that the two men, who are unrelated to each other, may also have been victims of a scam, said the police.
the 33-year-old man had allegedly received s$1,000 from scammers to help stage sam's "disappearance".
he bought the mobile phone and sim card for the victim's communication with the scammer and booked the hotel room.
these were all allegedly done on the scammer's instructions, said the police.
meanwhile, the 61-year-old man was also believed to have been tricked into thinking that he was housing an important witness for a police investigation.
anyone found guilty of cheating could be jailed up to 10 years and fined.
those found guilty of the offence of money laundering could be jailed up to 10 years, fined up to s$500,000, or both.
last year, a total of 443 cases of china official impersonation scams were reported, with victimscheated of more than s$39 million.
it marked a small decrease from 2019, which saw 456 such cases reported.
"the china police, interpol and other overseas law enforcement agencies have no jurisdiction or powers to conduct operation in singapore," said superintendent of police steven tan, head of the anti-scam investigation branch.
"they also have no powers to ask members of the public to help them with any form of investigation without the approval of the singapore government," he added.
ignore such calls and the caller's instructions, especially those who claim that they are overseas officials such as china police, interpol police or other overseas law enforcement agencies-          for foreigners receiving calls from people claiming to be the police from their home country, call the embassy or high commission to verify the claims of the caller-          refrain from giving out personal information and bank details, whether on the website or to callers over the phone-          for more information on scams, members of the public can visitscamalert.
sgor call the anti-scam hotline at 1800 722 6688. it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
tokyo (reuters) japan on friday (may 28) extended a state of emergency in tokyo and other areas by about three weeks to june 20 as the covid-19 pandemic shows no signs of easing less than two months before the summer olympics open.
the state of emergency in the capital and eight other prefectures had been scheduled to end on may 31, but strains on the medical system remain severe.
japan has seen a record number of covid-19 patients in critical condition in recent days, even as the number of new infections has slowed.
"in osaka and tokyo, the flow of people is starting to creep up, and there are concerns that infections will rise," economy minister yasutoshi nishimura, who also heads the country's coronavirus countermeasures, said at the start of a meeting with experts.
the experts later approved the government proposal and prime minister yoshihide suga officially announced the extensions.
worries about variants of the novel coronavirus and a slow vaccination drive have prompted urgent calls from doctors, some high-profile business executives, and hundreds of thousands of citizens to cancel the olympic games, due to start on july 23. japanese officials, olympics organisers and the international olympic committee (ioc) have said the games would go ahead under strict virus-prevention measures.
ioc's senior official john coates, who oversees the preparations, said last week the games were on whether or not the host city, tokyo, is under a state of emergency at the time.
tokyo 2020 organising committee president seiko hashimoto told a news conference she had received pledges from india – now battling a deadly second covid-19 wave – and five other countries to vaccinate all their olympic delegates as a measure against a new variant that has emerged in india.
ioc president thomas bach has said 80 per cent of the 10,500 athletes expected in japan would be vaccinated and on thursday urged olympians to get their shots if they could.
delegates must also be tested before and after arrival.
comments by ioc officials appearing to dismiss japanese concerns have sparked outrage on social media, including ioc's bach telling an international athletes forum on thursday: "come with full confidence to tokyo and get ready", calling tokyo the "best prepared olympic city ever".
"i want to say 'shut up'," said one twitter user.
"let's beat up on the ioc, which denigrates japan, and halt these crazy olympics.
"japan has recorded about 727,000 coronavirus infections and 12,597 deaths so far.
about 6 per cent of its population has been vaccinated, according to reuters data, the lowest among the world's larger, rich countries.
under the government's current plan, about 30 per cent of the population would be vaccinated by the end of july, mr nishimura said.
after meeting with japanese officials on thursday, european commission president ursula von der leyen backed tokyo's hosting of the olympics and said the european union had authorised the export to japan of more than 100 million vaccine doses, enough to inoculate about 40 per cent of the population.
international spectators will not be allowed for the games but some 90,000 people including athletes and their delegations will be coming.
no decision has been made yet on domestic fans and tokyo 2020's mr hashimoto said the situation regarding the state of emergency would need to be taken into account.
polls show a majority of japanese want the games, postponed last year due to covid-19, either cancelled or put off again.
that is a worry for mr suga, whose support has slid over his handling of the response to covid-19 and who faces a general election and a ruling party leadership race later this year.
but cancellation would carry its own political risk for the premier, some ruling party lawmakers said.
"the demerits would outweigh the merits," liberal democratic party mp hajime funada said.
"it would give the impression that japan is in such dire straits it cannot hold the games.
"japan's latest emergency steps, unlike stricter measures in many countries, have focused mainly on asking eateries that serve alcohol to close and those that don't to shut down by 8pm.
nomura research institute executive economist takahide kiuchi said an extension of the states of emergency would mean the economy would likely contract in the current quarter, pushing it back into a recession.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
yangon: a myanmar military tribunal has sentenced 28 people to 20 years in jail with hard labour for arson attacks on two factories, state media reported, after a string of mainly chinese-financed factories were torched during unrest in yangon in march.
the army-run myawady news portal said the offenders had targeted a shoe plant and a garment factory in the industrial hlaing tharyar suburb of myanmar's biggest city.
martial law was imposed in the suburb after the blazes, with dozens killed or wounded when security forces opened fire on anti-military protesters, media and an activist group said.
the chinese embassy in myanmar said at the time that many chinese staff were injured and trapped in the arson attacks and called on myanmar to protect chinese property and citizens.
a total of 32 chinese-invested factories were vandalised in the attacks, with property losses reaching 240 million yuan (us$36.
9 million), china's state-controlled tabloid global times said in march.
china is viewed as being supportive of the military junta that overthrew the elected government of aung san suu kyi on feb 1. no group claimed responsibility for burning the factories.
myanmar has been in chaos since the army took power and arrested aung san suu kyi and other members or her party, with daily protests, marches and strikes against the junta.
security forces have responded with lethal force, killing more than 800 people, according to the assistance association for political prisoners activist group.
the military disputes this figure and coup leader min aung hlaing recently said about 300 people had been killed in the unrest, including 47 police.
as well as renewed conflict with ethnic forces in border areas, fighting has also escalated between myanmar's army and often rag-tag militias opposed to the military in some regions.
in eastern myanmar near the border of shan and kayah states, dozens of security forces and local fighters have been killed in recent fighting, according to residents and media reports.
a resident taking refuge near the town of demoso reported on friday (may 28) that power was down and fighting had flared on thursday night with the constant thud of artillery.
"we feared that the bombs will hit us.
it made me tremble as they were constantly firing," said the resident, who asked not to be identified.
she said everyone had fled demoso and estimated that more than 40,000 people were taking refuge in areas around the town and were in need of food, clothing and shelter.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore: the police have observed a new variant of loan scams that involved fake letters or emails from banks or government agencies, requiring that victims pay an administrative fee before receiving their loan.
at least 20 reports were received between january and april this year, with losses amounting to more than s$200,000, the authorities said in a news release on wednesday (may 26).
in these cases, victims would receive unsolicited text messages or come across websites or advertisements offering loans.
victims who replied with the intention to take up a loan would be redirected to whatsapp to communicate their loan application.
scammers would then request for the victims' personal particulars so the loan application could be processed.
subsequently, the scammers would inform the victims that the loan had been approved before asking them to make payments of varying amounts as collateral, processing or transfer fees.
according to police, the scammers would present fake letters or emails they said were from banks or government agencies, such as the monetary authority of singapore or the state courts, which could indicate that the payments were required under specific regulations before the loan could be disbursed.
victims would only realise they had been scammed when they did not receive the loan, police added.
the authorities reminded the public that licensed moneylenders are not allowed to solicit for loans via text messages, phone calls or social media platforms.
these moneylenders are also required to meet the borrower in person at the approved place of business to conduct physical face-to-face verification of identity before granting any loan.
loan transactions are not allowed to be performed fully online.
licensed moneylenders will also not ask an applicant to make payments for the secure disbursement of the loan, including gst, "admin fees" and "processing fees".
processing fees or tax payments to a government agency are similarly not required.
the business address of each licensed moneylender is published on thelaw ministry's website.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
hong kong: hong kong residents reluctant to get the coronavirus jab have been given a million-dollar reason to roll up their sleeves after property tycoons donated a brand new flat to a vaccine lottery.
worth hk$10.
8 million (us$1.
4 million), the one-bedroom apartment will be the lucky draw's grand prize, the property developers announced on friday (may 28).
they will also offer 20 other prizes worth hk$100,000 each.
hong kong is one of the few places in the world to have secured more than enough doses to inoculate all 7.
5 million people.
but rampant distrust of the government combined with a lack of urgency in a comparatively virus-free city has led to hesitancy and a dismally lagging inoculation drive.
seeking to boost uptake, sino group, ng teng fong charitable foundation and chinese estates holdings said all hong kong residents aged 18 and above who have received both doses of a covid-19 vaccine will be eligible to register for the lucky draw until sep 1. only permanent residents are eligible for the top prize of an apartment in the world's most unaffordable housing market.
"we hope to increase hong kong's vaccination rate through the lucky draw," daryl ng, the director of the foundation said in a statement.
the groups said further details would be released at a later date.
the announcement came three days after the city's chief executive carrie lam rejected calls for the government to offer cash handouts to encourage inoculations.
she suggested local businesses provide the incentives.
"to offer cash or something physical to encourage vaccination shouldn't be done by the government," she said.
vaccine lotteries have started catching on in the united states, with california, colorado, ohio, new york and oregon offering a chance to win costly prizes.
a rural town in the philippines announced it will raffle off a cow to motivate people to get the jab.
in hong kong, less than 20 per cent of the population has received the first vaccine dose, while just over 14 per cent has received two doses.
hesitancy is common even among the city's medical workers.
earlier this month, the hospital authority revealed only one third of its staff had been vaccinated.
on tuesday, the rollout was expanded to non-residents, with around 40,000 chinese mainlanders with travel permits as well as about 13,000 asylum-seekers now eligible for jabs.
earlier this week, the hong kong airport authority announced its own giveaway of 60,000 free flights by the end of september to encourage the lagging vaccine rollout.
hong kong's hesitancy comes as many neighbouring countries scramble to secure enough doses to combat spiralling coronavirus outbreaks.
some hong kong politicians have suggested the city could look to send its unused doses overseas if take-up does not improve.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
bangkok: a royal academy chaired by princess chulabhorn, the youngest sibling of thailand's king, on friday (may 28) said it would import 1 million doses of sinopharm's covid-19 vaccine next month, after the food and drug administration (fda) authorised its use.
"we want to help plug in the gaps for business, schools, so they can move forward," nithi mahanonda, secretary-general of the chulabhorn royal academy told a news briefing.
earlier this week, the academy announced it would import "alternative vaccines" to supplement the government campaign.
the government's chaotic and widely criticised mass vaccinations programme is due to start next month, using mainly astrazeneca vaccines made locally by siam bioscience, a company owned by king maha vajiralongkorn.
the government says it will have 6 million astrazenaca doses and 3 million sinovac doses available in june.
the fda on friday approved the sinopharm coronavirus vaccine for emergency use, making it the fifth authorised by thailand after astrazeneca, sinovac's coronavac, johnson & johnson's janssen and moderna.
the royal academy procurement comes after thailand was hit by its worst covid-19 outbreak so far, with over 80 per cent of its 144,976 cases and 954 deaths occurring in the past two months, driven by the highly transmissible b117 variant first detected in britain.
slightly more than 1 million people in thailand are fully vaccinated, out of a population of 66 million.
the announcement in the official royal gazette surprised some members of the government, which had until now insisted on being the sole importer of covid-19 vaccines.
nithi said other organisations would be able to buy from the academy's 1 million sinopharm doses, adding that it did not seek profit.
the federation of thai industries and the energy firm ptt group have shown interest as potential buyers and the academy would continue to negotiate for more doses after june based on demand, nithi said.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore an $800 million support package that includes enhanced wage subsidies under the jobs support scheme (jss) and rental relief will be rolled out to help businesses and workers cope with the impact of tightened covid-19 restrictions.
announcing the measures on friday (may 28), finance minister lawrence wong said affected gyms, fitness studios and performing arts and arts education centres will get 50 per cent of salary support for local employees under the jss.
sectors that do not have to suspend operations but are significantly affected by the measures will get 30 per cent of jss subsidies.
this will help retailers, personal care service providers, museums, art galleries, historical sites, cinemas, indoor playgrounds and other family entertainment centres.
but supermarkets, convenience stores and online retailers will not be eligible for the enhanced wage support.
the enhanced payouts, which are based on wages paid in april to june this year, will be disbursed in september, said the ministry of finance (mof) in a statement.
employers who put local employees on mandatory no-pay leave or retrench them will not be eligible for jss payouts for those employees, the ministry added.
[[nid:518982]]other businesses that wish to appeal for enhanced jss support can do so at this website.
the various support measures for those affected by the phase two (heightened alert) restrictions from may 16 to june 13 will not require an additional draw on past reserves.
instead, they will be funded through a reallocation of spending, as some development expenditure can be capitalised under the recently passed significant infrastructure government loan act (singa) bill, mof said.
a supplementary supply bill will be tabled at the next parliament sitting in july to effect the reallocation of spending.
speaking at a virtual press conference, mr wong said the tightened measures have also been helping to curb the spread of the virus.
"therefore, we do not think there is a need for further tightening in our overall posture," he said, adding that the multi-ministry task force on covid-19 will give a fuller update at a press conference on monday.
if there are further extensions of the restrictions beyond june 13, mof will consider whether support measures can be similarly extended, he added.
mr wong, who co-chairs the task force, said the financial support package handed out this time round is not on the same scale as those allocated last year.
this is because most parts of the economy are still operating, and there are also more government schemes, like the jobs growth incentive, to support new jobs and opportunities.
last year, close to $100 billion was dedicated to covid-19 support measures over five budgets, with up to $52 billion drawn from the reserves.
[[nid:507545]]"our circumstances today are very different compared with last year.
and under such a circumstance, i don't think we should be going to the president to seek permission to draw on our past reserves" said the minister, adding that singapore must expect to run into situations like this from time to time, when restrictions need to be tightened temporarily to control the spread of the virus.
"so we will have to learn to adapt to such situations, using our own resources rather than to dip into our past reserves, and it's on that basis that we are able to set aside some funds for this package," said mr wong.
rental relief will also be given to small and medium-sized enterprises as well as eligible non-profit organisations in commercial properties, while eligible lower- to middle-income workers and self-employed workers whose income have been affected by the measures can receive a one-off payout of up to $700 under a new covid-19 recovery grant (temporary).
under the current covid-19 measures, services such as dining in, facials and saunas are barred from may 16 to june 13, while tighter capacity caps apply to retail spaces such as shopping centres and showrooms.
social gatherings are capped at two people.
[[nid:489530]]indoor sports facilities such as gyms, too, face tougher operating restrictions from may 8 to june 13 including having to close, unless they offer only low-intensity activities, where participants are masked and do not share common equipment.
some support has been given to businesses and workers to cushion the impact of the measures, but companies have sought more help from landlords and the government.
for instance, food and beverage businesses will get 50 per cent wage subsidies under the jss during the period for which dining in is prohibited, up from 10 per cent.
hawkers and coffee shop stallholders who are tenants of government agencies will also get a one-month rental waiver.
at least five mall operators have also pledged to help tenants hit by the stricter measures imposed on may 16, including by offering rental rebates.
this article was first published in the straits times.
permission required for reproduction.
china's military on thursday criticised the biden administration for continuing the trump era "indo-pacific strategy", saying the us should not form "cliques" or provoke "new cold war" featuring bloc confrontation.
no strategy should instigate countries to establish selective and exclusive military alliances, to gang up or to create the "new cold war" featuring bloc confrontation, and the zero-sum game will only lead to more division, antagonism and chaos, senior colonel tan kefei, spokesperson for the chinese ministry of national defence, said at an online press conference.
he made the remarks while responding to a question that us president joe biden has continued to promote the "indo-pacific strategy" formulated by his predecessor donald trump to deter china and made frequent military provocations against beijing.
his comments also came a week after a us navy guided-missile destroyer sailed through the taiwan strait on may 19, challenging china's claims over the area as beijing claims taiwan as part of its mainland.
the chinese navy, which rushed its ships to pursue the american warship, accused the us of resorting to provocative moves.
the us navy's 7th fleet said in a statement "the ship's transit through the taiwan strait demonstrates the us commitment to a free and open indo-pacific".
sr.  col.  tan did not directly refer to the quadrilateral alliance or quad comprising the us, india, australia and japan while accusing washington of forming cliques.
however, the chinese foreign ministry has in recent weeks stepped up attacks on the four-nation alliance, terming it as an exclusive clique portraying china as a challenge and sowing discord between beijing and regional countries.
tan, while claiming that china always holds that no strategy should go against the historical trend of peace and development, or deliberately hype up conflict and confrontation, said that intensifying military presence and highlighting military competition will only aggravate regional tensions and endanger world peace and stability.
"no strategy should harm the welfare of people in regional countries, or put them in a dangerous situation.
seeking one's own selfish interests and unilateral absolute security will only do harm to others and lose their support," he was quoted as saying by the chinese military online.
referring to the reported comments by a us defence department official that the us government intends to put in place more defence hotlines with china to manage security risks and prevent potential conflicts, the chinese defence ministry spokesperson said that for a long time, the chinese and american militaries have always maintained communication through multiple channels, including the direct line between the two defence ministries.
"we believe that its purpose is to enhance trust, reduce misgivings, manage crises, and prevent conflicts.
the us side should not, on the one hand, claim to put up new defence hotlines, while on the other hand keep ramping up military deployments in the asian pacific region, frequently conduct close-in reconnaissance on china, and even deliberately initiate dangerous circumstances where aircraft and vessels nearly collide, he said.
he said that china advises the us side to keep their words and match their deeds accordingly, display sincerity, work with the chinese side toward the same goal, and push forward the healthy and stable development of mil-to-mil relations by intensifying dialogue and communication and properly managing divergences.
china and the us are currently at loggerheads over a host of issues as the biden administration continued the tough policy to contain china initiated by trump, targeting beijing on xinjiang, hong kong and taiwan.
biden beefed-up the us-china policy by uniting us allies like the uk, the eu and japan.
he also hosted the first quadrilateral summit of the emerging alliance called quad in march which included the us, australia, japan and india.
📣 the indian express is now on telegram.
click here to join our channel (@indianexpress) and stay updated with the latest headlinesfor all the latest world news, download indian express app.
brussels: belgium on friday (may 28) said that it will recall its ambassador to south korea after the envoy's wife wasaccused of assaulting two boutique employeesin an incident that went viral.
belgian foreign minister sophie wilmes ordered ambassador peter lescouhier to end his mission this summer, a statement said, adding that that his spouse, xiang xueqiu, had met privately with the employees to apologise.
"now that mrs xiang xueqiu has personally presented her excuses and cooperated with the police, minister of foreign affairs sophie wilmes has decided that it is in the best interest of our bilateral relations to end ambassador lescouhier's tenure in the republic of korea this summer," the statement said.
it has "become clear that the current situation doesn't allow him to further carry out his role in a serene way", the statement said.
the foreign ministry added that belgium had waived xiang's diplomatic immunity and that belgian authorities "will of course continue to cooperate with the korean authorities as needed".
this followed widespread public anger over the possible claim for diplomatic immunity, which protects diplomats and their families from criminal prosecution.
officers questioned xiang earlier this month after the embassy said she would cooperate with police.
reports say the envoy's wife tried on clothes in a seoul store before walking out, prompting an assistant to run after her to ask about an item she was wearing and triggering the confrontation.
closed-circuit television camera footage showed her pulling at one employee's arm and hitting her in the head, before slapping another worker who tried to intervene across the face.
the footage provided by the family of an alleged victim was widely reported by local media and circulated online and turned public opinion sharply against the ambassador's family.
the belgian embassy initially issued the ambassador's apology in a bilingual facebook post as it sought to contain the damage, but its korean translation sounded heavy-handed, further souring some reactions.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
get the daily fully briefed newsletter, straight to your inbox.
(bloomberg) --the u. s.  is entering a period of intense competition with china as the government running the world's second-biggest economy becomes ever more tightly controlled by president xi jinping, the white house's top official for asia said.
"the period that was broadly described as engagement has come to an end," kurt campbell, the u. s.  coordinator for indo-pacific affairs on the national security council, said wednesday at an event hosted by stanford university.
u. s.  policy toward china will now operate under a "new set of strategic parameters," campbell said, adding that "the dominant paradigm is going to be competition.
"chinese policies under xi are in large part responsible for the shift in u. s.  policy, campbell said, citing military clashes on china's border with india, an "economic campaign" against australia and the rise of "wolf warrior" diplomacy.
beijing's behavior was emblematic of a shift toward "harsh power, or hard power," which "signals that china is determined to play a more assertive role," he said.
the blunt comments were among several signs of fresh tensions between the two countries, even as u. s.  trade representative katherine tai and chinese vice premier liu he held their first phone call.
before the talks, tai told reuters that the two sides faced "very large challenges" and president joe biden announced that he had ordered the u. s.  intelligence community to "redouble" its efforts to determine whether the covid-19 virus had escaped from a chinese lab.
biden said in a statement wednesday that chinese officials needed to be more transparent, and that beijing should join an "evidence-based international investigation and to provide access to all relevant data and evidence. "
the chinese embassy in washington dismissed the inquiry as a "smear campaign and blame shifting" that would hurt efforts to prevent future health crises.
china foreign ministry spokesman zhao lijian said at a regular press briefing thursday in beijing that the two countries "stand to gain from cooperation and lose from confrontation.
""china-u.
s.  relations will naturally experience some competition, which is prevalent among other major-country relations, but it is wrong to define the relationship with competition because it will only lead to confrontation and conflict," he said.
the two countries are also locked in disputes over beijing's claims over the south china sea, human rights in the xinjiang region, the future of taiwan and hong kong and economic concerns including the deployment of 5g technology and a global shortage of semiconductors.
chinese and u. s.  officials have said they see areas of cooperation, particularly on climate change, but on many other issues the relationship is far more frosty.
"the u. s.  idea of engagement is one that has conditions and is about bringing china into its system, not only in economics but also in politics," said wang yiwei, director of renmin university's institute of international affairs and a former chinese diplomat.
"the u. s.  sees china overtaking its own economy, so it is looking to contain china and prevent it from moving up the value chain.
"campbell knows well what it's like to negotiate with angry chinese diplomats.
in march he was among u. s.  officials who met with their chinese counterparts in alaska in talks that got off to a rocky start with bickering before reporters and cameras over human rights, trade and international alliances.
'unsentimental' xicampbell said xi was at the heart of the u. s. 's new approach to china ties.
he described the chinese president was "deeply ideological, but also quite unsentimental" and "not terribly interested in economics.
"since coming to power in 2012, xi has "almost completely disassembled nearly 40 years of mechanisms designed for collective leadership," campbell said, adding that top chinese diplomats such as politburo member yang jiechi and foreign minister wang yi -- the senior officials dispatched to the talks in alaska -- are "nowhere near, within a hundred miles" of the chinese leader's inner circle.
allies will be central to u. s.  efforts to push back against china in the years ahead, campbell said.
the u. s.  has already tried to build up the importance of its work within the so-called quad group of nations, which includes india, japan and australia.
and biden's first meetings at the white house with foreign heads of state were with japan's yoshihide suga and south korea's moon jae-in.
"we believe that the best way to engage a more assertive china is to work with allies, partners and friends," campbell said, adding that "the best china policy really is a good asia policy. "
still, he said the u. s.  will need to dispel fears of american decline in asia and offer a "positive economic vision" for the region.
"for the first time, really, we are now shifting our strategic focus, our economic interests, our military might more to the indo-pacific," campbell said.
(updates with china foreign ministry comments in sixth paragraph.
)more stories like this are available on bloomberg.
comsubscribe now to stay ahead with the most trusted business news source.
©2021 bloomberg l. p. stocks gained on friday as investors considered new economic data on consumer spending, income and inflation alongside stronger-than-expected data reports from earlier this week.
the flaw creates covert channels that let malicious apps communicate with each other.
!smart759 ,5%,smart!form 8.
3 irish takeover paneldisclosure under rule 8.
3 of the irish takeover panel act, 1997, takeover rules, 2013dealings by persons with interests in relevant securities representing 1% or more 1.  key information name of person dealing (note 1)state street global advisors & affiliatescompany dealt inudg healthcare plcclass of relevant security to which the dealings being disclosed relate (note 2)€0.
05 ordinary sharesdate of dealing27th may 2021 2.  interests and short positions (a) interests and short positions (following dealing) in the class of relevant security dealt in (note 3) longshort number(%)number(%)(1) relevant securities2,832,616 1.
12440% (2) derivatives (other than options)n/a (3) options and agreements to purchase/selln/a total2,832,616 1.
12440% (b) interests and short positions in relevant securities of the company, other than the class dealt in (note 3) class of relevant security:longshort number(%)number(%)(1) relevant securitiesn/a (2) derivatives (other than options)n/a (3) options and agreements to purchase/selln/a totaln/a 3.  dealings (note 4) (a) purchases and sales purchase/salenumber of relevant securitiesprice per unit (note 5)purchase37510.
53purchase25010.
53sale3,54010.
53sale5,07910.
53sale2,87010.
55sale2,91410.
53sale4,81510.
55sale11,60210.
53sale7,90110.
53 (b) derivatives transactions (other than options transactions) product name, e. g.  cfdnature of transaction (note 6)number of relevant securities (note 7)price per unit (note 5)n/a (c) options transactions in respect of existing relevant securities (i) writing, selling, purchasing or varying product name, e. g.  call optionwriting, selling, purchasing varying etc.
number of securities to which the option relates (note 7)exercise pricetype, e. g.  american, european etc.
expiry dateoption money paid/received per unit (note 5)n/a (ii) exercising product name, e. g.  call optionnumber of securitiesexercise price per unit (note 5)n/a (d) other dealings (including transactions in respect of new securities) (note 4) nature of transaction (note 8)detailsprice per unit (if applicable) (note 5)n/a 4.  other information agreements, arrangements or understandings relating to options or derivatives full details of any agreement, arrangement or understanding between the person disclosing and any other person relating to the voting rights of any relevant securities under any option referred to on this form or relating to the voting rights or future acquisition or disposal of any relevant securities to which any derivative referred to on this form is referenced.
if none, this should be stated.
n/a is a supplemental form 8 attached?
(note 9)no date of disclosure28th may 2021 contact namecolin fernandestelephone number 020 33956221if a connected efm, name of offeree/offeror with which connectedn/aif a connected efm, state nature of connection (note 10)n/a$mil aims to become the largest contributor to the veteran communityalexandria, va. , may 28, 2021 (globe newswire) -- military.
finance is a crypto token built on the bnb smart chain.
a group of guys with a passion for the veteran community, expertise in blockchain technology, and a successful marketing agency decided to put their skill sets together for a great cause.
military.
finance is the first cryptocurrency to dedicate a percentage of every transaction towards helping veterans.
their first large promotion will take place june 18th, in nashville, tn when military.
finance will become the first cryptocurrency to sponsor a nascar truck.
the partnership developed rather quickly and appears to be a solid bond.
driver keith mcgee served in the air force and made his nascar debut in 2018.  that year mcgee competed in the nascar whelen all-american series, finishing second in points, driving at his home track, alaska raceway park.
he is currently one of only two veterans on the nascar circuit and the only disabled veteran.
"it's funny how things find a way of working out," says brad dahl, developer of the military.
finance cryptocurrency.
"keith was looking for a new sponsor, and we were looking for partnerships that believe in our mission that could help spread the word. "
the sponsorship with nascar and driver keith mcgee is one of many made within the early stages of this token's existence.
military.
finance also partnered with major ed pulido and the heart of a lion foundation as the 501c3 charity for all of the initial donations.
heart of a lion is recognized as one of the top organizations supporting soldiers and families that face many challenges when coming back from the battlefield.
along with the nascar race in june, military.
finance plans on participating in several other upcoming events.
june 12th: celebrity softball classic, texas ranger stadiumjune 18th: nascar | rackley roofing 200, nashville superspeedwayjune 19th: john daly golf classic, lion's den golf course if you're interested in the token, the currency is currently available on pankcakeswap as part of the smart chain binance network.
for more information regarding the events, nascar sponsorship, becoming a partner, or simply wanting to know more, visit https://www.
military.
finance.
social links telegram: https://t.
me/military_finance youtube: https://www.
youtube.
com/channel/uc3_w7lrw22hqemgzryvtiua twitter: https://www.
twitter.
com/mil_finance reddit: https://www.
reddit.
com/r/military_finance/new/ instagram: https://www.
instagram.
com/military.
finance/ discord: https://discord.
com/channels/841495645801283584/841495645801283587 chart: https://charts.
bogged.
finance/?token=0xf5015995376a35b10dcbd96ba6b6e9de1c9f87c5 techrate audit: https://github.
com/techrate/smart-contract-audits/blob/main/military%20finance%20token.
pdf media contact company: military.
financecontact name: don dahladdress: 2121 eisenhower ave arlington, alexandria, va 22314, usae-mail: info@military.
financewebsite: https://www.
military.
finance/in conformity with the disclosure guidance and transparency rules, we hereby notify the market of the following:royal dutch shell plc's capital as at may 28, 2021, consists of 4,101,239,499 a shares and 3,706,183,836 b shares, each with equal voting rights.
royal dutch shell plc holds no ordinary shares in treasury.
the total number of a shares and b shares in issue as at may 28, 2021 is 7,807,423,335 and this figure may be used by shareholders as the denominator for the calculation by which they will determine if they are required to notify their interest in, or a change to their interest in, royal dutch shell plc under the fca's disclosure guidance and transparency rules.
enquiries shell media relations international, uk, european press: +44 (0)20 7934 5550 lei number of royal dutch shell plc: 21380068p1drhmj8ku70 classification: total number of voting rights and capital1.
75%,18,60,!westport, ct, may 28, 2021 (globe newswire) -- biosig technologies, inc.  (nasdaq: bsgm) ("biosig" or the "company"), a medical technology company commercializing an innovative signal processing platform designed to improve signal fidelity and uncover the full range of ecg and intra-cardiac signals, today announced that natasha drapeau, executive vice president of biosig technologies, inc.  would be presenting at the jefferies virtual healthcare conference on thursday, june 3, 2021, at 2 pm et.
biosig's pure ep(tm) system is an advanced signal acquisition and processing platform that aims to drive procedural efficiency and efficacy in electrophysiology.
the system provides essential diagnostic signals with high clinical value in all types of cardiac ablations that treat irregular heartbeats or arrhythmias.
to register for the live webcast of the event, please click here.
the presentation will be broadcast at 2 pm et on thursday, june 3, 2021.  a replay of the presentation will be available on the webcast page for 30 days following the event.
the company will also be available for one-on-one investor meetings at the conference.
one in 18 americans suffers from cardiac arrhythmia.
atrial fibrillation is the most common arrhythmia type, affecting over 33 million people worldwide, including over 6 million in the u. s.  the number of people suffering from atrial fibrillation is expected to reach 8-12 million by 2050.
1 according to the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), atrial fibrillation causes more than 750,000 hospitalizations in the u. s.  each year, resulting in approximately $6 billion in healthcare spending annually2.
to date, 48 physicians have completed over 850 patient cases with the pure ep(tm) system across nine clinical sites.
the pure ep(tm) system has been awarded fda 510(k) clearance.
the company commenced commercialization in 2020, having recently announced commercial sales to st.  david's healthcare of austin, texas, an hca healthcare-owned hospital, and mayo foundation for medical education and research.
more information about the event and the registration can be found on the jefferies conferences page.
about jefferies virtual healthcare conferencethis virtual gathering of over 400 public & private healthcare companies and 3,000 leading executives, institutional investors, private equity investors & vcs will address near- and long-term investment opportunities and discuss the current trends driving healthcare in the u. s.  and internationally.
about biosig technologies biosig technologies is a medical technology company commercializing a proprietary biomedical signal processing platform designed to improve signal fidelity and uncover the full range of ecg and intra-cardiac signals (www.
biosig.
com).
the company's first product, pure eptm system is a computerized system intended for acquiring, digitizing, amplifying, filtering, measuring and calculating, displaying, recording and storing of electrocardiographic and intracardiac signals for patients undergoing electrophysiology (ep) procedures in an ep laboratory.
forward-looking statements this press release contains "forward-looking statements. "
such statements may be preceded by the words "intends," "may," "will," "plans," "expects," "anticipates," "projects," "predicts," "estimates," "aims," "believes," "hopes," "potential" or similar words.
forward- looking statements are not guarantees of future performance, are based on certain assumptions and are subject to various known and unknown risks and uncertainties, many of which are beyond the company's control, and cannot be predicted or quantified and consequently, actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements.
such risks and uncertainties include, without limitation, risks and uncertainties associated with (i) the geographic, social and economic impact of covid-19 on our ability to conduct our business and raise capital in the future when needed, (ii) our inability to manufacture our products and product candidates on a commercial scale on our own, or in collaboration with third parties; (iii) difficulties in obtaining financing on commercially reasonable terms; (iv) changes in the size and nature of our competition; (v) loss of one or more key executives or scientists; and (vi) difficulties in securing regulatory approval to market our products and product candidates.
more detailed information about the company and the risk factors that may affect the realization of forward-looking statements is set forth in the company's filings with the securities and exchange commission (sec), including the company's annual report on form 10-k and its quarterly reports on form 10-q.
investors and security holders are urged to read these documents free of charge on the sec's website at http://www.
sec.
gov.
the company assumes no obligation to publicly update or revise its forward-looking statements as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
1 top 10 things you should know about heart rhythm; scripps health.
2 managing atrial fibrillation; lisa eramom ma, medical economics journal, february 25, 2019, volume 96, issue 4 contact: andrew ballou biosig technologies, inc.  vice president, investor relations 54 wilton road, 2nd floor westport, ct 06880 aballou@biosigtech.
com 203-409-5444, x133after a school year like no other, both the pikes peak online school (ppos) and colorado preparatory academy (cpa), two online public school serving students throughout the state, will celebrate its graduates online with a commencement ceremony for both schools today, may 28th at the colorado school of mines.
this year, ppos will graduate 200 students and cpa will graduate over 140 students.
wall street's major averages rose on friday as investors shrugged off data showing a jump in inflation, although recent worries about a spike in prices kept the s&p 500 on course for its smallest monthly gain since february.
in the 12 months through april, the so-called core pce price index vaulted 3.
1%, blowing past the federal reserve's 2% target and reflecting pent-up demand as the economy reopens.
technology stocks provided the biggest boost to the s&p 500, with salesforce.
com inc adding 7% after raising its full-year forecast for revenue and profit, helped by increased demand for its cloud-based software during the pandemic.
join our hybrid info session to hear from our sr.  executive director of the parttime mba weekday mode.
limited space available so secure yours today!the "triazophos (cas 24017-47-8) global market research report 2021" report has been added to researchandmarkets.
com's offering.
the "scratch-resistant glass market size, share & analysis, by type (chemically strengthened glass, synthetic sapphire), by application (display screens), by hardness scale (7 to 8.
5, above 8.
5), by end-use industry (smartphone & tablets), and by region, global forecast to 2028" report has been added to researchandmarkets.
com's offering.
wine merchants in northern portugal who suffered huge losses due to the covid-19 pandemic hope that some of the thousands of fans flocking to porto for the champions league final will fancy a glass or two of the region's famous port wine.
a total of 16,500 fans will be allowed into porto's soccer stadium for saturday's match between chelsea and manchester city.
many others are travelling to porto to support their teams from the sidelines.
「axa」:,6!vegas has reopened, but you don't need to go there: betting on amc entertainment holdings (nyse: amc) stock should do the trick.
amc shares have now almost tripled just this week, including another 25% surge as of 10 a. m.  edt this morning.
as of mid-may, more than 20% of amc shares were still held short, and traders are trying -- successfully -- to drive another short squeeze.
with cupe ontario's first-ever virtual convention still underway, delegates re-elected fred hahn as president and candace rennick as secretary-treasurer.
additionally, 4 vice-presidents were elected.
figure 1 figure 1.  location of the three groups of claims of the valorem property (in black) and the osisko development claims (in pink) overlain on the regional geology showing the two belts.
(inset) major cities and project area shown.
figure 2 figure 2.  regional geological setting of the cariboo gold district, east-central british columbia, showing principal terranes and major lithological packages.
areas of known lode-gold occurrences are shaded in yellow, and placer-gold producing creeks are indicated by thick purple lines.
principal known gold-producing areas in the barkerville terrane are in areas of greenschist-grade metamorphism and do not extend into amphibolite-grade domains.
the valorem property claims in the lightning creek and barkerville areas are represented by a red rectangle.
vancouver, british columbia, may 28, 2021 (globe newswire) -- valorem resources inc.  (the "company" or "valorem") (cse: valu) (frankfurt: 1xw1) is pleased to provide an update on exploration programs planned for its three gold, nickel, gold-copper, and specimen crystal prospects in british columbia, canada.
the first two properties, the bc gold project and the lac la hache gold project, are located in the cariboo district near the historical and currently active mining town of barkerville in central british columbia, while the third property, the pinto gold-copper project, is in the historical franklin mining camp north of the town of grand forks in south central british columbia.
the bc gold project is located southwest of the main barkerville district (see our news release dated january 29, 2021, and red square on figure 2 below), and a second project also located in the cariboo district, the lac la hache gold project, is located northeast of 100 mile house on the north shore of spout lake.
a third property, the pinto gold-copper project is located in the franklin mining camp north of grand forks in south central british columbia.
bc gold project the bc gold project, totalling 4,000 hectares, is comprised of three claim groups, the west, central and east (see figure 1), extending for approximately 9-15 kms southwest of the osisko development cariboo gold project.
as shown on figure 2, the property area is located in the red rectangle to the southwest of the town of barkerville.
figure 1: https://www.
globenewswire.
com/newsroom/attachmentng/b4dd3b82-9cdd-468c-b0ba-dec16f83c697 figure 2: https://www.
globenewswire.
com/newsroom/attachmentng/bd91497c-9f48-45a4-9a17-2f153ed3e5d1 the reader is cautioned that the presence of a deposit on the adjoining osisko development ground does not necessarily indicate that any such mineralization may be present on the company's holdings in the area, or that if discovered, any such mineralization may be economically extracted.
the western claims of the bc gold project are located near the mostique creek and lightening creek placer areas (see b. c.  minfile no.
093g009 and no.
093g060, respectively).
in addition, it covers the gem gold showing, a turbidite-hosted gold target (see b. c.  minfile no.
093g073).
exploration planned for the western claim group containing the two placer showings and the one bedrock showing in black phyllites will consist of in-depth prospecting and sampling of previously excavated pits on the gold showing in bedrock black phyllites, and compilation of all existing min files on this area.
encouraging geochemical values of gold are noted in min files from bedrock sources sampled by previous prospecting.
the central claims contain the sovreign nickel-talc-magnesite showing (assessment file sovreign creek deposit, 093a 013).
also within the central unit are the peters creek surficial placers and the wormwold creek surficial placers.
exploration work planned for the central claims include a re-evaluation of all work done on the nickel and talc zones prospected by historical work to follow up the potential for disseminated nickel values occurring as pentlandite (property file-findlay, 1971).
creek bottom geochemical sampling and ridgeline geochemical sampling and bedrock sampling for both nickel and gold, and prospecting will be conducted throughout the central claims.
the eastern claims cover several potentially economic target types.
the prime targets are the potential for orogenic gold deposits in the snowshoe group of rocks that host many gold occurrences in the barkerville district, plus potential for nickel in serpentinized ultramafic rocks within the property.
also in this claim group are the emerald valley showings of quartz-tourmaline pegmatite veins that host very large quartz and plagioclase feldspar crystals of possible value as gem material or specimen material for potential sale to mineral collectors (assessment report 33212).
both geochemical sampling on creeks and ridges, and prospecting in both the nickel and specimen crystal areas will be undertaken on the eastern claims.
there is no resource delineated on any of the claim groups in the bc gold project holdings lac la hache property the second property, the lac la hache gold project, comprises 180 hectares on the north shore of spout lake in the cariboo gold district located northeast of 100 mile house.
to the south of spout lake engold has been drilling a deposit variously characterized as skarn, carbonate replacement, or porphyry copper deposit containing a modest tonnage of copper-magnetite mineralization.
garibaldi resources has also been exploring a similar discovery in this area.
the upcoming program for the valorem property in this area will consist of geological, geophysical and geochemical surveying to seek a significant deposit in this prospective area.
the property is in the early stage of exploration and no resource has yet been established on the property.
pinto gold project the third property holding, the pinto gold-copper project, covers 80.
9 hectares just north of the historic franklin mining camp located 50 km north of grand forks in south central british columbia.
this property is in an area which has been subject to historical exploration interest by multiple majors during the 1980s, including both noranda exploration company ltd.  and inco ltd.  (see b. c.  minfile no.
082ene19).
several old workings and historical adits and shallow open pits are scattered in the area.
a grab sample by inco in 1989 assayed 6.
829 g/t gold, and a chip sample from a one-meter width of stockwork assayed 4.
6 g/t gold (b. c.  minfile no.
082ene19 and b. c.  assessment report 19385).
the pinto property covers portions of an intrusive complex that contains multiple showings of gold and copper that have been compared to and may be analogous to the historical phoenix mining camp located south of greenwood, b. c. , some 70 km to the southwest of the franklin camp.
the former phoenix mine produced 25.
5 million tonnes of ore averaging 0.
9% copper and 1.
1 grams gold per tonne.
it was mined both from underground and as an open pit from 1900-19 and again from 1956-78 (northern miner press, march 12, 2021).
current vtem surveying is being conducted in the vicinity of the phoenix mine in the search for additional copper-gold deposits.
the presence of copper-gold deposits in the analogous phoenix mine does not infer that any such mineralization may be present on the company's holdings, or that if discovered that any such deposit may be economically recoverable.
exploration on the pinto property will consist of re-evaluation of all available data, prospecting and possibly airborne geophysical vtem surveying to detect the potential for an intrusive-related porphyry copper style deposit.
tony louie, president of the company, stated: "valorem is very pleased to provide our shareholders with material exposure to the historic cariboo gold district.
the acquisition of the bc gold project and the lac la hache gold project establishes our presence in a premier historic gold camp in bc.
additionally, the pinto gold-copper project provides an entry into the historical franklin mining camp. "
qualified person: this press release has been prepared by, supervised by and approved by dr.  stewart a jackson, pgeo, a qualified person under national instrument 43-101, and independent of the company.
about valorem resources inc.  valorem explores and develops precious metal properties in the americas.
for further details and maps, please see:https://valoremresources.
com/ on behalf of the board valorem resources inc.  tony louie, interim ceo and directoremail: info@valoremresources.
comoffice: 888.
795.
6268 this news release includes certain statements that may be deemed "forward-looking statements".
all statements in this release, other than statements of historical facts, including the likelihood of commercial mining and possible future financings are forward-looking statements.
although the company believes the expectations expressed in such forward-looking statements are based on reasonable assumptions, such statements are not guarantees of future performance and actual results or developments may differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements.
factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those in forward-looking statements include unsuccessful exploration results, changes in metals prices, changes in the availability of funding for mineral exploration, unanticipated changes in key management personnel and general economic conditions.
mining is an inherently risky business.
accordingly, the actual events may differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements.
for more information on the company and the risks and challenges of its business, investors should review the company's annual filings which are available at www.
sedar.
com,.
!on may 28, 2021, tekla world healthcare fund paid a monthly distribution of $0.
1167 per share.
it is currently estimated that this distribution is derived from return of capital or other capital source.
the composition of this and subsequent distributions may vary from month to month because it may be materially impacted by future realized gains and losses on securities.
the aggregate of the net unrealized appreciation of portfolio securities and net realized gains on sale of securities is $79,082,184, of which $64,410,688 represents net unrealized appreciation of portfolio securities.
on may 28, 2021, tekla healthcare opportunities fund paid a monthly distribution of $0.
1125 per share.
it is currently estimated that this distribution is derived from net investment income, net realized short-term capital gains, net realized long-term capital gains and return of capital or other capital source.
the composition of this and subsequent distributions may vary from month to month because it may be materially impacted by future realized gains and losses on securities.
the aggregate of the net unrealized appreciation of portfolio securities and net realized gains on sale of securities is $225,244,006, of which $185,933,532 represents net unrealized appreciation of portfolio securities.
form 8.
3 irish takeover panel disclosure under rule 8.
3 of the irish takeover panel act, 1997, takeover rules, 2013 dealings by persons with interests in relevant securities representing 1% or more 1.  key information name of person dealing (note 1)state street global advisors & affiliatescompany dealt inaon plcclass of relevant security to which the dealings being disclosed relate (note 2)us$0.
01 ordinary sharesdate of dealing27th may 2021 2.  interests and short positions (a) interests and short positions (following dealing) in the class of relevant security dealt in (note 3) longshort number(%)number(%)(1) relevant securities9,396,110 4.
16494% (2) derivatives (other than options)n/a (3) options and agreements to purchase/selln/a total9,396,110 4.
16494% (b) interests and short positions in relevant securities of the company, other than the class dealt in (note 3) class of relevant security:longshort number(%)number(%)(1) relevant securitiesn/a (2) derivatives (other than options)n/a (3) options and agreements to purchase/selln/a totaln/a 3.  dealings (note 4) (a) purchases and sales purchase/salenumber of relevant securitiesprice per unit (note 5)purchase700253.
88purchase100253.
88purchase238253.
65purchase70253.
88purchase82253.
88purchase100253.
88purchase400253.
88purchase300253.
88purchase300253.
88purchase400253.
88purchase600253.
88purchase2,500253.
88purchase900253.
88purchase300253.
88purchase300253.
65purchase800253.
65purchase2,400253.
88purchase3,400253.
88purchase4,900254.
00purchase1,400253.
65purchase900253.
88purchase100253.
88purchase500253.
88purchase10,640253.
88purchase266253.
88purchase3,737253.
88purchase5,151253.
88purchase1,818253.
88purchase64253.
88purchase692253.
65purchase100253.
88purchase100253.
88purchase20253.
88purchase200253.
88purchase400254.
01purchase45253.
88sale1,100253.
88sale900253.
88sale4,900253.
88sale1,100253.
88sale100253.
88sale700253.
88sale900253.
88sale1,300253.
88sale90253.
88sale600253.
88sale100253.
88sale300253.
88sale200253.
88sale3,400253.
88sale500253.
88sale300253.
88sale300253.
88sale143253.
88sale101253.
88sale1,956253.
88sale2,608253.
88sale100253.
88sale1,708253.
88sale100253.
88sale800253.
95sale100253.
88 (b) derivatives transactions (other than options transactions) product name, e. g.  cfdnature of transaction (note 6)number of relevant securities (note 7)price per unit (note 5)n/a (c) options transactions in respect of existing relevant securities (i) writing, selling, purchasing or varying product name, e. g.  call optionwriting, selling, purchasing varying etc.
number of securities to which the option relates (note 7)exercise pricetype, e. g.  american, european etc.
expiry dateoption money paid/received per unit (note 5)n/a (ii) exercising product name, e. g.  call optionnumber of securitiesexercise price per unit (note 5)n/a (d) other dealings (including transactions in respect of new securities) (note 4) nature of transaction (note 8)detailsprice per unit (if applicable) (note 5)n/a 4.  other information agreements, arrangements or understandings relating to options or derivatives full details of any agreement, arrangement or understanding between the person disclosing and any other person relating to the voting rights of any relevant securities under any option referred to on this form or relating to the voting rights or future acquisition or disposal of any relevant securities to which any derivative referred to on this form is referenced.
if none, this should be stated.
n/a is a supplemental form 8 attached?
(note 9)no date of disclosure28th may 2021 contact namecolin fernandestelephone number 020 33956221if a connected efm, name of offeree/offeror with which connectedn/aif a connected efm, state nature of connection (note 10)n/ayour dreams come true here.
check out men who want to chat and date join datemyage.
coma string of failures led to the deaths of two young people in a terror attack at london's fishmongers' hall after authorities were blinded by their killers' "poster boy image", an inquest jury has concluded.
cambridge graduates jack merritt, 25, and saskia jones, 23, were fatally stabbed by convicted terrorist usman khan at an alumni event put on by prisoner education programme learning together on november 29, 2019.   khan, 28, who wore a fake bomb vest, was tackled by delegates armed with a narwhal tusk and a fire extinguisher, and driven out on to london bridge where he was shot dead by police.
katie o'malley speaks to royal photographer chris jackson about what it's really like to photograph a royal baby's first appearancethe slump in business travel due to covid-19 cost the uk economy £5.
4 billion last week, a new study tracking the sector has estimated.
the business travel association (bta) said there were 90% or 131,449 fewer trips than the same week of may 2019 across ten international and domestic air routes.
it believes the weekly hit to uk gdp from international business travel is £4.
4 billion, led by france at £778 million.
melbourne: five million weary melbourne residents returned to lockdown on friday (may 28), straining local resolve and testing australia's "zero-covid" strategy of smothering outbreaks however small.
as authorities said the cluster of positive cases had grown to 39, streets in australia's second city emptied out for the fourth time since the pandemic began.
"it's just very difficult," resident gavin catt told afp.
"this lockdown is affecting us.
many families and friends can't work.
"melbournians have been ordered tostay at home for seven daysto stall transmission and buy the authorities time to investigate how the virus again jumped from hotel quarantine into the community.
the outbreak is believed to have begun when a traveller infected with a variant first found in india returned to australia, but victoria's acting state premier james merlino called for military help with the investigation.
about 15,000 close contacts have been identified and the list of venues visited by confirmed cases had grown to 130. merlino on thursday blamed sluggish vaccine rollout and hotel quarantine failures for the latest outbreak.
"if we had an alternative to hotel quarantine for this particular variant of concern, we would not be here today," he said.
it is believed to be the 17th time in six months that the virus has leaked out of makeshift hotel quarantine facilities, which are now facing tough scrutiny.
fingers are also being pointed at australia's conservative federal government for the slow rate of vaccinations, which threatens to reverse the country's early virus success.
australia has recorded 30,000 covid-19 cases since the pandemic began wth a large portion in hotel quarantine in a country of 25 million people.
but only 2 per cent of australians have so far been fully vaccinated.
"i'm from new york originally so i feel like we've had a really good go of it here in australia in terms of how many people have gotten sick," said david gonzalez.
"so i guess i'm willing to accept a bit of a slow rollout but if these things happen more often, they just have to get more vaccines in the country.
"prime minister scott morrison has defended his government's handling of the crisis saying hotel quarantine facilities were "99.
99 per cent effective.
"but critics countered that a single infection leaking from a quarantine system that has processed thousands of travellers was sufficient to shut down an entire state, and the country's second-biggest city.
in recent months, australians had largely been enjoying few restrictions after the country successfully contained the spread of coronavirus.
but outbreaks in taiwan and japan have underscored how initial success containing the virus can quickly be eroded without widespread vaccination.
australia is currently vaccinating about 75,000 people each day.
in a note to clients on friday, the national australian bank warned that it is "clear that virus outbreaks from hotel quarantine remain a significant risk for australia until a high degree of vaccine penetration is reached".
"on the current pace, australia will not reach a level of vaccination approaching herd immunity (estimates suggest that is around 70 per cent or higher) by the end of the year.
"downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
image for representationhong kongers reluctant to get the coronavirus jab have been given a million-dollar reason to roll up their sleeves after property tycoons donated a brand new flat to a vaccine lottery.
they will also offer 20 other prizes worth hk$100,000 each.
hong kong is one of the few places in the world to have secured more than enough doses to inoculate all 7.
5 million people.
but rampant distrust of the government combined with a lack of urgency in a comparatively virus-free city — has led to hesitancy and a dismally lagging inoculation drive.
nothing against ramdev, will consider withdrawing police plaints if he takes back remarks: ima chiefhad no criminal intent to cheat, kalra tells court in oxygen concentrator black marketing caseseeking to boost uptake, sino group, ng teng fong charitable foundation and chinese estates holdings said all hong kong residents aged 18 and above who have received both doses of the covid-19 vaccines will be eligible to register for the lucky draw until september 1. only permanent residents are eligible for the top prize of an apartment in the world's most unaffordable housing market.
"we hope to increase hong kong's vaccination rate through the lucky draw," daryl ng, the director of the foundation said in a statement.
the groups said further details would released at a later date.
the announcement came three days after the city's chief executive carrie lam rejected calls for the government to offer cash handouts to encourage inoculations.
she suggested local businesses provide the incentives.
"to offer cash or something physical to encourage vaccination shouldn't be done by the government," she said.
vaccine lotteries have started catching on in the united states, with california, colorado, ohio, new york and oregon offering a chance to win costly prizes.
a rural town in the philippines announced it will raffle off a cow to motivate people to get the jab.
hesitancy is common even among the city's medical workers.
earlier this month, the hospital authority revealed only one third of its staff had been vaccinated.
on tuesday, the rollout was expanded to non-residents, with around 40,000 chinese mainlanders with travel permits as well as about 13,000 asylum-seekers now eligible for jabs.
earlier this week, the hong kong airport authority announced its own giveaway of 60,000 free flights by the end of september to encourage the lagging vaccine rollout.
hong kong's hesitancy comes as many neighbouring countries scramble to secure enough doses to combat spiralling coronavirus outbreaks.
some hong kong politicians have suggested the city could look to send its unused doses overseas if take-up does not improve.
read all the latest news, breaking news and coronavirus news here
kuala lumpur: malaysia will close all economic and social sectors by implementing a "total lockdown" throughout the country.
the first phase of the lockdown will last from jun 1 to jun 14.  this move was announced in a media statement posted on prime minister muhyiddin yassin's facebook page on friday (may 28) night.
only essential economic and service sectors listed by the national security council will be allowed to operate during phase 1 of the lockdown, said the statement issued by prime minister's office (pmo).
"this decision was made after taking into account the current situation of covid-19 transmission in malaysia with daily case numbers exceeding 8,000 and active cases exceeding 70,000," the statement read.
more than 2,550 people in malaysia have died from the disease.
the emergence of more virulent covid-19 variants also influenced the national security council's decision to implement the lockdown.
with the sharp rise in the daily number of covid-19 cases, hospitals' capacity to treat patients throughout the country are "becoming more limited", the statement added.
if the phase 1 total lockdown is successful in reducing daily covid-19 cases, the government will implement a four-week phase 2 lockdown by allowing the reopening of a few economic sectors that do not involve large gatherings.
phase 2 lockdown will last four weeks.
"once the phase 2 lockdown ends, the next step is phase 3, which is implementing a movement control order (mco) similar to the current one in effect, where social activities are not allowed and nearly all economic sectors are allowed to operate subject to strict standard operating procedures and limited physical presence at workplaces," the pmo said.
however, the decision to move from one phase to the next will be subject to the health ministry's risk assessment, and will be based on the daily caseloads and the hospitals' capacity to treat covid-19 patients.
the government will ensure the malaysian public health system will not crumble and that support and assistance will be given to the health ministry to increase hospital capacity, said the pmo.
"the government will also increase the number of vaccine deliveries in the space of the next few weeks in the effort to develop herd immunity in the country.
"as a result of the government's decision to execute full economic and social shutdown, the finance ministry will detail assistance packages for the people and affected economic sectors," pmo stated, adding these would be announced in the very near future.
pmo's announcement came as malaysiaset a covid-19 case recordfor the fourth straight day with 8,290 new infections, bringing the national total past 549,000. sixty-one more covid-19 fatalities, aged between 27 and 92 were reported, pushing malaysia's death toll to 2,552. anationwide mcodubbed mco 3.
0 was reimposed in may, when all economic sectors were allowed to operate but people were encouraged to practise "self-lockdown".
amid calls for the government to impose a full lockdown as cases remained high, the government had announced tightened curbs that mandated more employees to work from home and business operating hours to be shortened.
mr muhyiddin, in a may 23 interview, said that while a full lockdown would guarantee people's safety, there isa risk that the economy could collapse.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore: a 54-year-old man has been arrested after allegedly using criminal force against police officers and failing to comply with covid-19 regulations, among other offences, the singapore police force (spf) said on friday (may 28).
the man was allegedly drunk, not wearing a mask and acting aggressively towards passers-by along tanjong pagar road on may 23 when police attended to him.
"police officers advised the man to wear a mask, but he allegedly refused to comply," spf said in a news release.
"he then purportedly hurled vulgarities, unzipped his pants to expose his private parts and directed sexually explicit remarks at the officers.
"the man also allegedly threatened to slap police officers and gesticulated wildly, causing his hands to strike an officer on his nose.
"the man was subsequently arrested.
investigations are ongoing.
"members of the public are advised to take the prevailing safe distancing measures seriously," spf said.
"the police take a stern view of abusive and irresponsible behaviours relating to the flouting of safe distancing measures and offenders will be dealt with in accordance with the law.
"those who commit the offence of using criminal force to deter a public servant from discharge of his duty face up to four years in prison, a fine, or both.
the offence of causing annoyance whilst drunk carries a penalty of up to six months in prison, a fine of up to s$1,000, or both.
offenders who utter words or make gestures intended to insult the modesty of any person face up to a year in prison, a fine, or both.
individuals who are found guilty of the offence of appearing nude in a public place can be punished with up to to three months' jail, a fine, or both.
under the covid-19 (temporary measures) (control order) regulations 2020, individuals who do not wear a mask or do not wear a mask properly outside their homes can face up to six months in prison, a fine of up to s$10,000, or both.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
an international firefighting effort to put out a huge blaze on a container ship off sri lanka's coast will likely take days, the country's navy chief said thursday, amid mounting fears of a major oil leak.
nine sri lankan ships and three indian vessels have been working with international salvage experts to douse the eight-day old inferno on the singapore-registered x-press pearl.
the vessel was carrying nearly 1,500 containers, including 25 tonnes of nitric acid, when a fire broke out as it waited to enter colombo port.
it is believed that the fire was sparked by a leak of nitric acid on the 186 metre (610 feet) long ship.
monsoon winds fanned the flames.
but easing winds in the indian ocean will make firefighting efforts easier, sri lanka navy chief vice admiral nishantha ulugetenne said, describing the sea and wind conditions as "favourable".
"i hope in another few days we can extinguish this fire completely," he told afp.
sri lanka's marine environment protection authority (mepa) has said it fears the vessel could break up and leak oil onto coastal beaches.
"the hull may not be stable for us to tow the ship away from our waters," mepa chairman dharshani lahandapura told afp.
the vessel, now anchored, is carrying 278 tonnes of bunker oil and 50 tonnes of marine gasoil, she said.
avoidable disaster -lahandapura said the crew knew about a nitric acid leak on may 11 before entering sri lankan waters and that the fire could have been avoided if they acted promptly.
the ship's operator, x-press feeders of singapore, confirmed they knew about the acid leak, but said attempts to leave the leaking container in india and qatar had failed.
it said port authorities in the two countries had rejected requests because they did not have specialist facilities.
sri lankan authorities have lodged a formal complaint with police ahead of initiating legal action against the ship's captain.
lahandapura said a large quantity of oil threatens to leak and pollute the tourist and fishing region of negombo, 40 kilometres (25 miles) north of the capital.
"our best option is to clean the beach and we suspect any clearing operation will take a few weeks, if not months," she said.
sri lankan soldiers were deployed thursday to clean negombo beach as debris from eight containers that fell into the sea after the explosion washed ashore.
police also arrested eight people who had been scavenging for plastic raw materials and cosmetics that washed up for violating coronavirus lockdown regulations.
in september last year, an oil tanker caught fire off sri lanka's east coast after an engine room explosion that killed one crew member.
the fire on the new diamond tanker took more than a week to put out and left a 40 kilometre (25 mile) long oil spill.
sri lanka has demanded the owners pay a $17 million clean-up bill.
the 25 crew on the x-press pearl were evacuated on tuesday following the explosion.
two suffered minor injuries, the owners said, and one, an indian national, has tested positive for covid-19.
the ship was on its way to colombo from india's gujarat state.
the vessel is anchored 14 kilometres (7.
5 nautical miles) offshore and can be seen from negombo.
aj/tw/ohoin a wooded corner of estonia 120 kilometres (75 miles) from the russian border, some 7,000 soldiers are taking part in a nato battleground exercise.
a malaysian woman who entered singapore to carry out illegal cosmetic procedures in 2019 was on friday (28 may) jailed for 10 weeks and fined $5,500.
$6,600「」,$100「」the grave keeps getting deeper for tajuddin abdul rahman.
this article, after disastrous press conference, ex-prasarana chairman probed for alleged corruption, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
find out who stuck with their day jobs and who didn't.
this article, 7 celebrities who married into malaysian royalty, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
one of the first robo-advisors in the now crowded space, stashaway is a name well-known by many.
here's what you can expect when you invest your cash or srs funds with stashaway.
as one of the early players in the robo-advisory space in singapore, stashaway [.
.
. ]
the post stashaway review: goal-getting investments through etfs appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
smart,5%!$1,600,!bytedance founder zhang yiming, the brains behind tiktok, said he preferred "daydreaming" as he stepped down as head of his own firm last week.
but his departure comes as several of china's once-lauded tech entrepreneurs step aside under increasing scrutiny from a government concerned about their growing power and influence.
the ministry of health (moh) on friday (27 may) confirmed 30 new covid-19 cases in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 61,970. hdb flat rentals make up a large part of singapore's property market—according to hdb, there are about 60,000 flats currently being rented out.
we examined rental trends across different hdb estates and here's what we found.
《!》ut,!shares in the parent company of hong kong's pro-democracy apple daily newspaper quadrupled on thursday as trading in them resumed following an eight-day suspension.
australia closed its embassy in afghanistan on friday, highlighting security fears for foreign missions and their local workers as us-led troops pull out of the war-torn country.
two sleek new roads vanish into mountain tunnels high above a sleepy montenegrin village, the unlikely endpoint of a billion-dollar project bankrolled by china that is threatening to derail the tiny country's economy.
「axa」:,6!the package will assist workers and companies hit by the ongoing phase 2 (heightened alert).
aye mar sits with her seven children in their yangon kitchen and worries whether their meal of rice and stringy vegetables -- all she can afford in coup-stricken myanmar -- will satisfy their hunger.
hong kong's security chief has warned bankers for jailed media tycoon jimmy lai chee-ying that dealing with his frozen accounts could land them in prison for up to seven years.
when asked whether his move would undermine the reputation of the city as a global financial hub, john lee ka-chiu said on thursday he was following the national security law laid down by beijing last summer that banned acts of subversion, secession, terrorism and collusion with foreign forces.
"i am exercising the power because lai has been charged with two offences of collusion with other countries or external forces to endanger national security," he said.
"it is my duty to specify in my notice to the relevant parties what will be the consequences if they fail to comply with my direction.
"do you have questions about the biggest topics and trends from around the world?
get the answers with scmp knowledge, our new platform of curated content with explainers, faqs, analyses and infographics brought to you by our award-winning team.
the security bureau froze nearly hk$500 million (us$64 million) of lai's assets earlier this month, including his 71 per cent stake in next digital, which publishes the apple daily tabloid, as well as the local bank accounts of three other companies he owns.
the move marked the first time authorities had invoked new powers to freeze or take control of assets of a listed company that could be related to the commission of a national security crime.
but lee said the warning contained in letters sent to an unspecified number of banks after the freezing was only related to assets under suspicion and people carrying out normal business should have nothing to worry about.
lai has been accused of collusion with a foreign country and was also charged with two counts of conspiracy last month.
he is currently serving 14 months in prison for taking part in unauthorised assemblies connected to the anti-government protests of 2019.  jimmy lai asset freeze nothing to do with press freedom, says security chief a spokesman of the hong kong monetary authority, which is responsible for maintaining the city's status as a financial centre, said it would not comment on cases under investigation by police.
but he pointed to the long history that banks had in cooperating with law enforcement agencies in criminal investigations, including freezing and confiscating funds and property under relevant laws, including the national security law.
next digital resumed trading after a 10-day suspension following the freezing of lai's assets and its share price surged 330 per cent from the hk$0.
19 (us$0.
02) at opening to as high as hk$0.
80 (us$0.
10), before falling to hk$0.
28 (us$0.
04) at the close of market.
next digital's management issued a statement on wednesday saying its unaudited bank and cash balances as of march 31 stood at hk$521.
4 million (us$67 million) and its working capital would last a minimum of 18 months from april 1, even without additional funding from lai.
it also said the asset freeze had no impact on a standing shareholder's loan lai had provided to the company and its subsidiaries.
but that assessment was questioned by former city leader leung chun-ying who has been a staunch critic of apple daily but also revealed that he was a minority stakeholder in the company.
leung put the reserves closer to hk$100 million, after subtracting outstanding bank loans totalling hk$93.
6 million, and other liabilities and payables.
"will the bank call the loans?
will suppliers continue to offer credit terms?"
he said on his facebook page.
noting the statement was issued by the board, leung questioned why it had not made its own assessment during the trading suspension, rather than relying on the management's.
ex-hong kong leader has government on the defensive.
is he planning a comeback?
"who is the person in charge of the management?
this is the chief executive officer.
and who is the chief executive officer?
he is cheung kim-hung," he wrote.
the former leader – who is also a vice-chairman of china's top political advisory body – had already lashed out at cheung before next digital's announcement, revealing on wednesday that he had appointed a lawyer to file a formal complaint with law enforcement against the ceo for making "negligent, irresponsible and intentionally misleading" remarks.
leung disputed cheung's suggestion the company's operations and finances would not be affected by the freezing of lai's assets, and demanded a thorough investigation by authorities.
asked about the criticisms, cheung declined to comment.
additional reporting by jeffie lammore from south china morning post:hong kong authorities freeze nearly hk$500 million in assets belonging to media tycoon jimmy laifuture of hong kong's apple daily is on the line after founder jimmy lai's assets are frozen under national security lawthis article national security law: jimmy lai's hong kong bankers warned that handling assets could land them in jail first appeared on south china morning postfor the latest news from the south china morning post download our mobile app.
copyright 2021.
!marla40,.
$50,.
many of the syrian fighters deployed, sometimes forcibly, in foreign conflict theatres such as libya and nagorno-karabakh are robbed of their wages, said a report released thursday.
the trial of an australian academic detained for more than two years in china on espionage charges began behind closed doors on thursday, with canberra voicing deep concerns over a lack of transparency after its ambassador was denied access.
rafael nadal, novak djokovic and roger federer, the three most successful men in grand slam tennis history, were on thursday all drawn in the same half of the french open.
,.
!five million weary melbourne residents were put back under lockdown on friday, straining local resolve and testing australia's "zero-covid" strategy of smothering outbreaks however small.
investors rejected the responses of us oil giants to climate change wednesday, installing activist board members at exxonmobil and directing chevron to deepen emissions cuts.
belarus on wednesday accused french authorities of committing an act of "air piracy" after a belarusian passenger plane flying from minsk to barcelona was denied passage through french airspace and turned back.
belarusian state carrier belavia said that flight b2869 with 56 passengers on board had been refused permission to go through french airspace and had to spend around two hours in mid-air before returning to minsk.
singapore: singapore reported 14 new covid-19 community cases and one new infection in a migrant worker dormitory on thursday (may 27).
twelve of these locally transmitted infections were linked to previous cases, all of whom had been placed in quarantine.
the remaining three cases are currently unlinked, said the ministry of health (moh).
there were also nine imported cases.
they were placed on stay-home notice or isolated upon arrival in singapore.
seven are returning singaporeans or permanent residents.
in total, 24 new covid-19 cases were reported in singapore on thursday.
unlinked community casestwo of the unlinked cases are community infections.
the first unlinked community case is a 43-year-old singaporean woman who works at govtech.
she was last at work on may 7. she developed a fever, runny nose and body aches on may 24 and sought medical treatment at a general practitioner clinic on may 25, when she underwent both an antigen rapid test (art) and polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test.
she was immediately isolated when her art result came back positive on the same day.
her pcr test result came back positive on may 26.  her serology test result is negative.
the second unlinked community case is a 67-year-old singaporean retiree.
he developed a cough and runny nose on may 25 and sought medical treatment on the same day.
he was immediately isolated when his art result came back positive.
his pcr test result also came back positive on the same day.
his serology test result is negative.
hong ye group cleaners clusterof the 12 linked cases, three are employed by hong ye group as cleaners at changi business park.
the first case is a 25-year-old singaporean man who tested positive for covid-19 on may 27.  he is a workplace contact of a previous case and a household contact of another case.
the second new case in this cluster is a 58-year-old singaporean man who is a workplace contact of a previous case.
he developed symptoms on may 20 and was quarantined the following day after being identified as a workplace contact of a previous case.
he did not report his symptoms.
the 58-year-old man tested positive for covid-19 on may 26. the third new case is a 56-year-old singaporean woman who was also identified as a close contact of a previous case.
she tested positive for covid-19 on may 26. there are now six cases in this cluster.
pacific law clusterthree new cases have been linked to the pacific law cluster.
all three new cases are family members and household contacts of a 50-year-old woman who works at the law firm.
the new cases were quarantined on may 22, and tested positive for covid-19 on may 26 while in quarantine.
the first new case is a 76-year-old singaporean man who is employed by clean solutions as a cleaner at henry park primary school, and the second case is a 74-year-old singaporean homemaker.
both have completed the full vaccination regimen.
the third new case in this cluster is a 43-year-old singaporean man who works as a retail assistant at alpha audio.
there are now seven cases in this cluster.
changi prison complex clustera 61-year-old singaporean inmate at changi prison complex is linked to the cluster there.
he is a close contact of a previous case.
the new case was quarantined on may 13, and was tested on may 13, may 17, may 19, may 21 and may 23, with all tests returning negative.
on may 25, he was tested again, with the test result coming back positive for covid-19.
the next day.
the inmate received his first dose of a covid-19 vaccine on mar 30 and the second dose on apr 20. there are now 13 cases linked to this cluster.
tektronix clustera 43-year-old permanent resident who works at tektronix southeast asia has been linked to a new cluster there.
he was arranged by his company to be tested for covid-19 on may 24 and his art result came back negative.
he was quarantined the following day as he had been identified as a workplace contact of a previous case.
the man developed a fever, cough and sore throat on may 25 and he was tested for covid-19.
the test result came back positive on the same day.
this new cluster now has three cases, all of whom work at the firm.
cluster linked to patec engineeranother new cluster identified on thursday is linked to a 28-year-old singaporean engineer who works at engineering firm patec.
he tested positive on may 18.  there are three cases in this cluster.
the new case on thursday that is linked to this cluster is a 55-year-old singaporean man who is a family member and household contact of the two other cases.
he works as a dispatch rider at mv credit, and was quarantined on may 18.  he tested negative for covid-19 on may 21, and developed a fever on may 25 but did not report it, said moh.
the man was taken to tan tock seng hospital the next day after his fever continued.
he was tested for covid-19 at the hospital and his result came back positive on may 27. cluster linked to westwood secondary school studenta 53-year-old singaporean man who works as a driver at kim transport and as a part-time private hire car driver with grab tested positive for covid-19 on may 26. he is a household contact and family member of a westwood secondary school student who tested positive, and another case.
there are now four cases linked to this cluster.
other linked casesother linked cases in the community include a 55-year-old singaporean freelance handyman and a 50-year-old singaporean man who works at assalaamu'alaikum enterprise.
moh said that the cluster linked to case 62049 has been closed, as there have been no new cases linked to it for the past 28 days, said moh.
case 62049 is a 79-year-old indian national who arrived from india to visit his family member who is a permanent resident.
new dormitory caseone new case was reported in a migrant worker dormitory on thursday.
case 63750 is a 42-year-old bangladeshi man who is employed by teng feng engineering and works at harvest @ woodlands.
he lives at woodlands lodge 2.
"he has reported that he had not interacted with previous cases (cases 63622, 63696, 63697, 63698, and 63723) who reside at harvest @ woodlands," said moh, adding that the new case is currently unlinked.
he is asymptomatic and was detected when he was tested on may 23 as part of rostered routine testing.
he was isolated after his pooled test result came back positive on may 24. an individual test was done on may 25, and his test result came back positive for covid-19 the following day.
"his serology test result is negative for the n antigen, which suggests the presence of early infection," said moh.
he received his first dose of a covid-19 vaccine on may 14. imported casesnine imported cases were reported on thursday, including five singaporeans and two permanent residents who returned from india.
also among the new imported cases is a short-term visit pass holder who arrived from indonesia to visit her family member, who is a singaporean.
the remaining imported case is a special pass holder who is a sea crew member.
he arrived from indonesia on a vessel and was tested when he was hospitalised for a medical condition that was unrelated to covid-19, said moh.
all nine cases were placed on stay-home notice or isolated upon arrival in singapore.
two cases in icuoverall, the number of new cases in the community has decreased from 190 in the week before to 152 in the past week.
the number of unlinked cases has also decreased from 43 in the week before to 26 in the past week.
among the 210 cases reported between may 21 to may 27, 46 have tested positive in their serology tests and 137 have tested negative.
another 27 serology test results are pending.
twelve more covid-19 cases have been discharged from hospitals or community isolation facilities, taking singapore's total recoveries to 61,372. there are currently 245 cases still in hospital, most of whom are stable or improving.
two are in critical condition in the intensive care unit.
another 291 cases who have mild symptoms or are clinically well but still test positive for covid-19 are isolated and cared for at community facilities.
singapore will toughen entry requirements for returning citizens and permanent residents to manage the risk of imported cases and onward transmission in the community.
"in recent weeks, the global situation has worsened, and we have observed the emergence of new and potentially more infectious variants," said moh on wednesday.
from 11.
59pm on may 29, returning singaporeans and permanent residents must present a valid negative covid-19 polymerase chain reaction test taken within 72 hours before their departure for singapore.
only those who have stayed in lower-risk places – australia, brunei, mainland china, new zealand, hong kong and macau – in the 21 days before departure will be exempted.
as of thursday, singapore has reported a total of 61,940 covid-19 cases and 32 fatalities from the disease.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
two pupils from concord primary school in choa chu kang a pastor from grace assembly of god church were among the 26 new covid-19 cases announced by the ministry of heath (moh) last night.
the first pupil is an 11-year-old boy who developed a cough last saturday but did not report his symptoms, while the second is a six-year-old girl who developed flu-like symptoms on monday.
both pupils were in quarantine from last friday and had last gone to school on may 17, said moh.
the pastor is a 30-year-old permanent resident who visited jem on may 11. she is asymptomatic and her infection was detected after she was tested for covid-19 on monday as part of surveillance testing operations for those who visited jem and westgate.
her test came back positive on tuesday.
grace assembly of god church was one of the first covid-19 clusters formed last year.
it was not clear which of the church's two branches the infected pastor is from.
the jem and westgate cluster now has 60 people and is the second-largest active cluster here.
a new cluster was also formed after two cases were linked to a 15-year-old westwood secondary school student.
the singaporean was confirmed to be infected on monday and included in moh's release on tuesday.
two more cases were also added to the mcdonald's delivery riders cluster.
there are now 15 cases linked to it.
one more migrant worker from the harvest @ woodlands dormitory tested positive, expanding the cluster to five people.
other cases announced yesterday include a 25-year-old cleaner who works at changi business park, a two-year-old girl from my first skool at 331 sembawang close, and a 20-year-old student from national university of singapore who works part-time at poke theory in novena.
this article first appeared in the straits times.
26 new cases23 new cases in community1 new case in dormitories2 imported cases61,916 total cases32 deaths31 discharged yesterday61,345 total recovered242 in hospitalget the new paper on your phone with the free tnp app.
download from the apple app store or google play store now
singapore — the ministry of health (moh) on wednesday (26 may) confirmed 26 new covid-19 cases in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 61,916. of them, 24 are local cases: 23 are in the community and one resides in a migrant worker dormitory.
twenty-one of them are linked to past cases, of whom 14 have already been quarantined.
two remaining cases are imported: a foreign domestic worker who arrived from indonesia and a short-term visit pass holder who arrived from the united arab emirates to visit his singaporean family member.
wednesday marks the 31st consecutive day with local cases reported.
"amongst the new cases today, six are asymptomatic, and were detected from our proactive screening and surveillance, while 20 were symptomatic," said the moh.
the ministry also identified two new covid-19 clusters, bringing the total number of active clusters in singapore to 34.  the sole dorm case is the fifth infection linked to the harvest @ woodlands dorm cluster and was placed on quarantine on 22 may.
he is a 22-year-old male india national who works as a general worker at h&w communications and the roommate of the first case linked to the cluster.
the three unlinked cases in the community are:a 58-year-old singaporean woman who works at chevy's bar and bistro (received first dose of vaccine)a 38-year-old malaysian man who works at rong chang f&b servicesa 24-year-old malaysia man who works at mcdonald's (the woodgrove)separately, there are four cases linked to other infections but are not part of any active clusters yet, including a 52-year-old singaporean woman who also works at chevy's bar and bistro as a server.
the three remaining linked contacts are family members and household or workplace contacts of previously reported cases:a 64-year-old singaporean woman who is a homemaker (already quarantined)a 20-year-old singaporean woman who is a national university of singapore student, and works part-time at poke theorya 38-year-old singaporean permanent resident who works at tektronix southeast asiathe moh noted that the number of new cases in the community has decreased from 187 in the week before to 165 in the past week.
the number of unlinked cases in the community has also decreased from 40 in the week before to 30 in the past week.
several new places have also been added to the list of public venues visited by infectious community cases, including mandai crematorium and columbarium complex, a fairprice finest outlet at le quest mall, eccellente by hao mart at kinex and a mcdonald's outlet at woodgrove.
in a separate press release, the ministry announced that from 11.
59pm on 29 may, the pre-departure testing requirement will be extended to all singapore residents.
this means singaporeans and prs entering or transiting through singapore, except for those who have stayed in lower-risk countries or regions throughout the last 21 days before departure for singapore, will need to present a valid negative covid-19 pcr test taken within 72 hours before departure for singapore.
hong ye group cleaners cluster, 3 in total: the first case linked to the cluster is a 31-year-old singaporean man who is employed by the company as a cleaner at changi business park and was confirmed to have covid-19 on 19 may.
his colleague, a 25-year-old singaporean woman, is the third and latest case to be added to the cluster.
she had been placed on quarantine on 22 may.
"case 63708" cluster, 3 in total: the cluster is named after a 15-year-old singaporean boy who is a westwood secondary school student and was confirmed to have covid-19 on 24 may.
the third and latest case to be added to the cluster is a 74-year-old malaysian man who is a retiree.
the family member and household contact of a case in the cluster was placed on quarantine on 25 may.
he had received his first dose of the covid-19 vaccine on 19 march.
at 60 cases, it is the second-largest out of 34 active clusters, after changi airport's 108-case cluster.
on monday, three clusters were subsumed into the jem/westgate cluster.
authorities have also identified a potential source of transmission for the jem/westgate cluster: a 53-year-old singaporean woman who works as a cleaner at park avenue rochester, a stay-home-notice dedicated facility.
four of the seven new cases added on wednesday had been quarantined earlier and are family members or household contacts, or both, of previous cases in the cluster:a 6-year-old singaporean girl who is a concord primary school studentan 11-year-old singaporean boy who is a concord primary school studenta 29-year-old singaporean man who works as a technician at singapore refining companyan 18-year-old singaporean boy who is an ite college west studentthe remaining three either travel frequently to jem for work or had visited the shopping mall:a 67-year-old singaporean man who works as a delivery driver for dch auriga (singapore) (tested preliminarily positive for the india variant, or b1617; fully vaccinated)a 28-year-old singaporean woman who works as a hairdresser at kimage hair salon (lot 1) (visited jem on 9 may)a 30-year-old female pr who works as a pastor at grace assembly church.
(visited jem on 11 may)the cluster was first linked to a 50-year-old singaporean woman who works as a tutor at learning point at parkway centre and was confirmed to have covid-19 on 12 may.
the new addition, who had been quarantined on 23 may, is a 35-year-old thai woman who works as a staff at santai café at united world college.
she is a family member and household contact of a case in the cluster.
the cluster was first linked to a 27-year-old malaysian man who works as a delivery rider for ivic logistic and mcdonald's (bedok reservoir).
he was confirmed to have covid-19 on 20 may.
four cases in the cluster work at a pizza hut outlet at punggol plaza.
the two new cases are:a 41-year-old female pr who works as a receptionist at wanderloft hostel, and a part-time waitress at collins (nex) (quarantined earlier)a 58-year-old singaporean woman who works as a kitchen staff and service crew at mcdonald's (pasir ris elias community club) (received first dose of vaccine)the cluster at the prison was first linked to a 39-year-old male china national who is a chef at its complex.
the fully-vaccinated man was confirmed to have covid-19 on 13 may.
the latest addition, a 49-year-old singaporean man who is a prison inmate there, brings the total number of inmates in the cluster to nine.
the man had tested negative for covid-19 in five prior tests.
the cluster is named after the case number of a 53-year-old singaporean man who works as a personal chauffeur and confirmed to have covid-19 on 14 may.
the man also tested preliminarily positive for the india variant, or b.
1.
617. the latest addition to the cluster is a family member and household contact of two cases: a 31-year-old man from hong kong who works as a senior executive at endowus and was placed on quarantine on 14 may.
the cluster at the casino was first linked to a 36-year-old malaysian man who works as a dealer there and was confirmed to have covid-19 on 16 may.
one of the cases in the cluster, one of two infections who are not working at the casino, had tested preliminarily positive for the india variant, or b.
1.
617. the latest case to be added to the cluster is the fifth employee at the casino: a 36-year-old malaysian man who works as a dealer there and had been quarantined earlier.
the cluster was named after the case number of a 34-year-old singaporean man who works as a technician at singapore refining company.
the latest case linked to the cluster is a two-year-old singaporean girl who is a student at my first skool at 331 sembawang close.
she is a family member and household contact of the man, and was placed on quarantine on 20 may.
with 31 more patients discharged from hospitals or community isolation facilities on wednesday, 61,360 cases – or 99.
1 per cent of the total – have fully recovered from the infection.
most of the 242 hospitalised cases are stable or improving, while two of them are in critical condition in the intensive care unit.
a total of 282 patients – with mild symptoms or are clinically well but still test positive – are isolated and cared for at community facilities.
apart from the 32 patients who have died from covid-19 complications, 15 others who tested positive for the virus were determined to have died from unrelated causes, including three whose deaths were attributed to a heart attack and another four, whose deaths were attributed to coronary heart disease.
among the 227 confirmed cases reported from 20 to 26 may, 54 cases have tested positive for their serology tests, 138 have tested negative, and 35 serology test results are pending.
stay in the know on-the-go: join yahoo singapore's telegram channel at http://t.
me/yahoosingaporemore singapore stories:woman charged for not wearing mask at mbs, outside court and elsewherehsa approves pfizer covid vaccine storage in fridge for up to 31 dayscovid: changi airport terminals segregated in bid to curb spread of india variantman with schizophrenia who killed wife and dog jailed 10 yearsa malaysian woman who entered singapore to carry out illegal cosmetic procedures in 2019 was on friday (28 may) jailed for 10 weeks and fined $5,500.
in a wooded corner of estonia 120 kilometres (75 miles) from the russian border, some 7,000 soldiers are taking part in a nato battleground exercise.
$6,600「」,$100「」find out who stuck with their day jobs and who didn't.
this article, 7 celebrities who married into malaysian royalty, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
the grave keeps getting deeper for tajuddin abdul rahman.
this article, after disastrous press conference, ex-prasarana chairman probed for alleged corruption, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
one of the first robo-advisors in the now crowded space, stashaway is a name well-known by many.
here's what you can expect when you invest your cash or srs funds with stashaway.
as one of the early players in the robo-advisory space in singapore, stashaway [.
.
. ]
the post stashaway review: goal-getting investments through etfs appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
,cover; ,,the ministry of health (moh) on friday (27 may) confirmed 30 new covid-19 cases in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 61,970. hdb flat rentals make up a large part of singapore's property market—according to hdb, there are about 60,000 flats currently being rented out.
we examined rental trends across different hdb estates and here's what we found.
aye mar sits with her seven children in their yangon kitchen and worries whether their meal of rice and stringy vegetables -- all she can afford in coup-stricken myanmar -- will satisfy their hunger.
《!》ut,!two sleek new roads vanish into mountain tunnels high above a sleepy montenegrin village, the unlikely endpoint of a billion-dollar project bankrolled by china that is threatening to derail the tiny country's economy.
an international firefighting effort to put out a huge blaze on a container ship off sri lanka's coast will likely take days, the country's navy chief said thursday, amid mounting fears of a major oil leak.
many of the syrian fighters deployed, sometimes forcibly, in foreign conflict theatres such as libya and nagorno-karabakh are robbed of their wages, said a report released thursday.
!marla40,.
$50,.
the package will assist workers and companies hit by the ongoing phase 2 (heightened alert).
shares in the parent company of hong kong's pro-democracy apple daily newspaper quadrupled on thursday as trading in them resumed following an eight-day suspension.
bytedance founder zhang yiming, the brains behind tiktok, said he preferred "daydreaming" as he stepped down as head of his own firm last week.
but his departure comes as several of china's once-lauded tech entrepreneurs step aside under increasing scrutiny from a government concerned about their growing power and influence.
「」$1,000!
(25) ,,,,2!five million weary melbourne residents were put back under lockdown on friday, straining local resolve and testing australia's "zero-covid" strategy of smothering outbreaks however small.
roland garros has been a happy hunting ground for many of the greatest grand slam champions, but rising stars naomi osaka and daniil medvedev are hoping to avoid joining the list of tennis' big names who could never conquer the parisian clay.
investors rejected the responses of us oil giants to climate change wednesday, installing activist board members at exxonmobil and directing chevron to deepen emissions cuts.
,.
!hong kong's security chief has warned bankers for jailed media tycoon jimmy lai chee-ying that dealing with his frozen accounts could land them in prison for up to seven years.
when asked whether his move would undermine the reputation of the city as a global financial hub, john lee ka-chiu said on thursday he was following the national security law laid down by beijing last summer that banned acts of subversion, secession, terrorism and collusion with foreign forces.
"i am exercising the power because lai has been charged with two offences of collusion with other countries or external forces to endanger national security," he said.
"it is my duty to specify in my notice to the relevant parties what will be the consequences if they fail to comply with my direction.
"do you have questions about the biggest topics and trends from around the world?
get the answers with scmp knowledge, our new platform of curated content with explainers, faqs, analyses and infographics brought to you by our award-winning team.
the security bureau froze nearly hk$500 million (us$64 million) of lai's assets earlier this month, including his 71 per cent stake in next digital, which publishes the apple daily tabloid, as well as the local bank accounts of three other companies he owns.
the move marked the first time authorities had invoked new powers to freeze or take control of assets of a listed company that could be related to the commission of a national security crime.
but lee said the warning contained in letters sent to an unspecified number of banks after the freezing was only related to assets under suspicion and people carrying out normal business should have nothing to worry about.
lai has been accused of collusion with a foreign country and was also charged with two counts of conspiracy last month.
he is currently serving 14 months in prison for taking part in unauthorised assemblies connected to the anti-government protests of 2019.  jimmy lai asset freeze nothing to do with press freedom, says security chief a spokesman of the hong kong monetary authority, which is responsible for maintaining the city's status as a financial centre, said it would not comment on cases under investigation by police.
but he pointed to the long history that banks had in cooperating with law enforcement agencies in criminal investigations, including freezing and confiscating funds and property under relevant laws, including the national security law.
next digital resumed trading after a 10-day suspension following the freezing of lai's assets and its share price surged 330 per cent from the hk$0.
19 (us$0.
02) at opening to as high as hk$0.
80 (us$0.
10), before falling to hk$0.
28 (us$0.
04) at the close of market.
next digital's management issued a statement on wednesday saying its unaudited bank and cash balances as of march 31 stood at hk$521.
4 million (us$67 million) and its working capital would last a minimum of 18 months from april 1, even without additional funding from lai.
it also said the asset freeze had no impact on a standing shareholder's loan lai had provided to the company and its subsidiaries.
but that assessment was questioned by former city leader leung chun-ying who has been a staunch critic of apple daily but also revealed that he was a minority stakeholder in the company.
leung put the reserves closer to hk$100 million, after subtracting outstanding bank loans totalling hk$93.
6 million, and other liabilities and payables.
"will the bank call the loans?
will suppliers continue to offer credit terms?"
he said on his facebook page.
noting the statement was issued by the board, leung questioned why it had not made its own assessment during the trading suspension, rather than relying on the management's.
ex-hong kong leader has government on the defensive.
is he planning a comeback?
"who is the person in charge of the management?
this is the chief executive officer.
and who is the chief executive officer?
he is cheung kim-hung," he wrote.
the former leader – who is also a vice-chairman of china's top political advisory body – had already lashed out at cheung before next digital's announcement, revealing on wednesday that he had appointed a lawyer to file a formal complaint with law enforcement against the ceo for making "negligent, irresponsible and intentionally misleading" remarks.
leung disputed cheung's suggestion the company's operations and finances would not be affected by the freezing of lai's assets, and demanded a thorough investigation by authorities.
asked about the criticisms, cheung declined to comment.
additional reporting by jeffie lammore from south china morning post:hong kong authorities freeze nearly hk$500 million in assets belonging to media tycoon jimmy laifuture of hong kong's apple daily is on the line after founder jimmy lai's assets are frozen under national security lawthis article national security law: jimmy lai's hong kong bankers warned that handling assets could land them in jail first appeared on south china morning postfor the latest news from the south china morning post download our mobile app.
copyright 2021. the trial of an australian academic detained for more than two years in china on espionage charges began behind closed doors on thursday, with canberra voicing deep concerns over a lack of transparency after its ambassador was denied access.
australia closed its embassy in afghanistan on friday, highlighting security fears for foreign missions and their local workers as us-led troops pull out of the war-torn country.
singapore: lower-to middle-income workers who have been financially affected by therecent tightening of covid-19 measureswill receive a one-off payout under a temporary recovery grant.
under the covid-19 recovery grant (temporary), eligible self-employed workers will also be able to receive such support, said the ministry of finance (mof) on friday (may 28).
"the livelihoods of some workers have also been affected, such as those in f&b, hawkers, retail, arts as well as sports and fitness sectors," said mof in the media release.
"the government will introduce the covid-19 recovery grant (temporary) scheme to provide one-off support for lower- to middle-income employees and self-employed persons who are financially impacted as a result of the tightened measures.
"eligible individuals placed on involuntary no-pay leave for at least a month between the heightened alert period of may 16 to jun 30 may receive a one-off payout of up to s$700.
workers who also experienced significant income loss during the same period of at least 50 per cent for at least a month may receive a one-off payout of up to s$500, added mof.
applications for the grant will be open from jun 3 to jul 2.  more details on the grant will be released by the ministry of social and family development.
the grant runs in parallel with theexisting covid-19 recovery grant scheme.
the scheme will remain open for those who are retrenched or able to show that their incomes have been impacted or are placed on involuntary npl over a sustained period of at least three consecutive months.
in the same media release, mof said that the ministry of education (moe) will extend the suspension of loan repayment and interest charges for tuition fee loans, study loans and overseas student programme loans by another four months, until sep 30. moe had earlier suspended the repayment and interest charges of these loans for all autonomous university and polytechnic graduates for a year from jun 1 to may 31.
"this will give our graduates more time to find a stable financial footing, and to plan their finances," said mof.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
the rejection of exxon mobil corp. 's management team marks one of the most significant victories for shareholders who have been pushing for drastic action on climate change.
the movement to transform exxon's board of directors was led by a previously little-known hedge fund called engine no.
1, which has just a 0.
02% stake in exxon and no history of activism in oil and gas.
the firm gained at least two board seats at exxon's annual shareholder meeting wednesday and promised to push the crude driller to diversify beyond oil.
engine no.
1 was backed by two of the largest u. s.  pension funds and some of the world's biggest asset management firms, including blackrock inc. the exxon vote sends an important message not only to exxon and the other big oil companies, but "also to esg investors at large," said bloomberg intelligence analyst rob du boff.
"the fact that asset managers such as blackrock were swayed by engine no.
1's cause is another sign that esg issues, and climate change in particular, are now mainstream.
"the $255 billion new york state common retirement fund and the $300 billion california state teachers' retirement system have been promoting climate-friendly corporate policies and environmental, social and governance investment principles for years now, and both got behind engine no.
1's exxon push.
so did the church commissioners for england and blackrock, which has been criticized for its uneven track record on supporting environmental-related shareholder resolutions.
esg advocates said the rebuke of exxon is going to make it much easier for sustainability investors.
"just a few years ago we were ignored, but now companies know that they have to pick up the phone and speak with esg investors," said kristin hull, founder of nia impact capital in san francisco.
"esg is now core to investment processes and decisions," said kalina lazarova, a london-based director in bmo global asset management's responsible-investment team.
"environmental and social issues can now make or break directors in a way that wasn't previously possible.
"engine no.
1, though a tiny company, was successful because "it tapped into broadly held discontent among investors who are ever more sensitive to climate and broader esg topics," lazarova said.
catherine howarth, chief executive officer of shareaction, a nonprofit focused on responsible investing, agreed.
"engine no.
1 forced all these big investors to take a side," she said.
"for years we were told by large institutional investors that behind closed doors they were getting there with companies in the oil and gas sector, but they have delivered so little," howarth said.
meantime, engine no.
1 is "really moving the field," she said.
blackrock, the second-largest holder of exxon, with a 6.
6% stake, voted for three of the new directors nominated by engine no.
1, according to a vote bulletin published wednesday.
but the investment giant also backed chief executive officer darren woods, who opposed investor demands for a change to the company's approach on climate change -- a move that rankled environmental groups who called for the firm to vote against them.
blackrock said in its bulletin that it was "concerned about exxon's strategic direction" and that the company could benefit from the addition of the new directors who would "bring the fresh perspectives" to exxon's board.
exxon's failure to act on previous investor demands to tackle climate change led to the company's loss, said new york comptroller thomas dinapoli.
"the fact that exxon hasn't been responsive up until now, in a way they set the stage for their own defeat," he said wednesday in a bloomberg tv interview.
watch: new york state comptroller thomas dinapoli talks about exxon's board vote.
source: bloombergcalstrs called the exxon vote "historic. "
it represents a tipping point for companies unprepared for the global energy transition, the pension fund said.
while the exxon board election is the first of a large u. s.  company to focus on the global energy transition, it won't be the last, according to the statement.
chevron corp. , another oil giant, also suffered a rebuke from shareholders at its annual meeting wednesday when investors voted for a proposal to compel the company to reduce pollution by its customers.
additionally, a dutch court issued a ruling wednesday that ordered royal dutch shell plc to slash its net carbon emissions.
these decisions send "a strong signal that esg is mainstream," said timothy smith, director of esg shareowner engagement at boston trust walden.
"corporations are realizing that these issues aren't fringe anymore.
"climate-focused investors "built the intellectual scaffolding that enabled engine no.
1 to get two of its nominees on the board," said jonas kron, chief advocacy officer at trillium asset management.
"esg investors have told companies for years to think honestly and transparently about climate change risk management.
the market has now caught up.
"— with assistance by annie massa, simon casey, and joe weisenthal
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore lower- to middle-income workers who are financially impacted by the latest covid-19 restrictions may receive a one-time payout of up to $700 under a new temporary grant, the ministry of finance (mof) said on friday (may 28).
the grant covers those who are self-employed as well.
eligible workers who have been placed on involuntary no-pay leave for at least a month from may 16 to june 30, or who have suffered an income loss of at least 50 per cent for at least a month over the same period, may apply for the new covid-19 recovery grant (temporary) (crg-t).
mof said the grant, part of an $800 million support package that is being rolled out to help individuals and businesses amid the current heightened alert period, is being introduced as the livelihoods of some workers in the food and beverage, retail, and sports and fitness sectors have been affected.
under the grant, eligible individuals placed on involuntary no-pay leave may receive a one-off payout of up to $700, while those experiencing significant income loss may receive a one-off payout of up to $500.
mof said applications will be open from june 3 to july 2. the ministry of social and family development (msf) will release more details shortly.
crg-t is a supplement to the existing covid-19 recovery grant (crg), which was launched on jan 18 to support lower- to middle-income workers and self-employed people affected by the pandemic, finance minister lawrence wong said at a press conference on friday.
"there are certain conditions and criteria attached to the crg.
we are not changing that.
but we are, in a way, piggybacking on the existing scheme with a temporary scheme with different conditions specific to the current heightened alert situation, where activities have been scaled back and there are these additional restrictions.
""so this is temporary, it's meant for this particular period.
after that we will continue with the regular crg scheme," mr wong added.
the crg, which was extended by three months in march, provides up to $700 per month for three months for workers who have lost jobs or have been placed on involuntary no-pay leave due to covid-19.
for lower- to middle-income workers and self-employed people facing income loss of at least 50 per cent for at least three consecutive months, the crg provides up to $500 a month for three months.
msf said in march that the crg had supported more than 10,000 people and disbursed about $10 million as at march 22. there will also be additional support for polytechnic and autonomous university graduates who have to repay student loans, said mof.
the ministry of education (moe) will extend the suspension of loan repayments and interest charges by another four months, until sept 30.  with the extension, no interest, whether standard or penalty interest, will be levied on any outstanding loan for the additional four-month period.
these include tuition fee loans, study loans and overseas student programme loans, which are all government loans.
moe said in a statement that those with outstanding loans will be automatically granted the extension.
these include graduates who have already started paying back their loans, and students with outstanding loans who will graduate before sept 30. those who wish to continue repaying their student loans can do so by informing their tertiary institutions and banks to make the necessary arrangements.
moe had previously suspended loan repayments and interest charges for a year, from june 1 last year to may 31 this year.
the finance ministry said the four-month extension will give graduates more time to find a stable financial footing, and to plan their finances.
mr wong said there is scope to extend the loan repayment suspension even further.
but that will depend on the state of the current outbreak and whether the economy can recover from it.
he said: "before the latest round of heightened alert measures, the economic outlook was improving.
.
.
and if you look at the employment prospects for fresh graduates, it was also improving.
"but given the latest situation, the uncertainty that the new strains have posed not just to singapore but also to the global economy.
.
.
we discussed with moe and decided that we would give a short extension.
"mr wong added: "if the situation indeed does improve, and this current outbreak proves to be temporary, we get back to our recovery trajectory and the external economy remains strong, then i think september should be a reasonable timeframe.
"but if things were to worsen, be it on the external front or even within singapore in terms of our own growth trajectory, then, of course, we will be prepared to reconsider and see if further extensions are needed.
"meanwhile, mof also highlighted support measures for private-hire and taxi drivers, as well as retailers at changi airport, announced over the past two weeks.
private-hire and taxi drivers will receive additional cash support of $10 per vehicle per day for the period of may 16 till the end of june, with the government setting aside an additional $27 million as a one-off top-up to the covid-19 driver relief fund.
changi airport group on monday said it was fully waiving rental fees for retailers in changi airport terminals from may 13 to june 13 while the airport remains closed to the public.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
new infection rates and strain on hospitals remain high despite weeks of restrictionstokyo -- japan is poised to extend the current state of emergency until june 20, as hospitals in tokyo, osaka and other regions remain overwhelmed by covid-19 patients.
the formal decision will come after government officials hear the opinions of experts on friday.
the decision will come less than two months before the scheduled start of the tokyo olympics on july 23.  japan's government, local authorities and the organizing committee for the games are slated to determine attendance caps for each venue next month, and officials say they hope to see the situation improve before then as the country's slow coronavirus vaccine rollout picks up speed.
other asian nations are also trying to douse flare-ups in covid-19 infections.
malaysia on thursday reported 7,857 new cases, marking the third straight day of record tallies.
taiwan reported 667 new local cases as it battles its worst coronavirus spread so far in the pandemic.
japan logged 4,140 new cases wednesday, with 106 new deaths.
rising covid-19 cases in asia have prompted the recent cancellation of two major events in singapore, the world economic forum special annual meeting in august and the annual asia security summit, known as the shangri-la dialogue.
ten of japan's 47 prefectures are now under the state of emergency, which was first declared april 25 in tokyo and the greater osaka region.
the decree, which already has been extended once in some regions, was set to be lifted at the end of this month in all except for okinawa, which was just added to the list sunday.
japan has struggled to control the spread of highly infectious new virus variants.
restaurants, bars and shopping centers in these areas have been asked to close or shorten their hours, but new cases in eight of the 10 prefectures remain at the highest level of the government's four-stage scale of outbreak severity.
hospital bed occupancy rates are at stage 4 in all but tokyo.
prime minister yoshihide suga discussed the emergency decree thursday evening with officials including health minister norihisa tamura, in light of requests from authorities in tokyo and other prefectures to extend it.
"overall, we're in an unpredictable situation," suga told reporters after the meeting.
"we'll make a decision after speaking with experts tomorrow.
"japan also could extend intensive anti-coronavirus measures now in place elsewhere in the country.
these are set to expire monday in five prefectures, including three in the greater tokyo area.
sign up to our newsletters to get our best stories delivered straight to your inbox.
discover the all new nikkei asia appdiscover the all new nikkei asia appstay ahead with our exclusives on asia; the most dynamic market in the world.
stay ahead with our exclusives on asiaget trusted insights from experts within asia itself.
get trusted insights from experts within asia itself.
stay ahead with our exclusives on asia; the most dynamic market in the world.
get trusted insights from experts within asia itself.
offer ends january 31styou need a subscription to.
.
.
you need a subscription to:
        
        nikkei asian review, now known as nikkei asia, will be the voice of the asian century.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore a police officer who was accused of bullying an elderly woman in yishun has spoken out, saying that while the accusations were upsetting at first, he will not stop helping members of the public when duty calls.
station inspector jeff lim kok hwee, 45, a deputy team leader at yishun south neighbourhood police centre, shared his side of the story, adding that he is glad that "the truth is out".
on may 19, the singapore police force refuted allegations circulating online that four police officers, including station insp lim, had told the elderly woman off for not wearing her mask.
the social media posts claimed that the officers had abused their authority in dealing with the elderly woman.
two days later, the fake news law was invoked by home affairs minister k.  shanmugam, requiring an instagram user as well as the singapore uncensored and the online citizen asia (toc) websites to carry correction notices for their posts on the incident.
but after toc doubled down on its claims, the police released two clips of body-worn camera footage on tuesday (may 25), taken from the officers involved in the incident.
the footage showed station insp lim buying the woman a packet of food from a nearby stall and instructing the woman's domestic helper to remind her to wear a mask when she is out.
speaking to the media on friday, station insp lim said he was called to the scene on the evening of may 17 after receiving a call from a member of the public about an elderly woman who appeared to be lost and was not wearing a mask.
when he arrived with three of his colleagues, he said he tried to make her comfortable by sitting down to chat with her.
"through chatting with her, i understood that she was waiting for her friends and i was concerned that she might be hungry, and that's when i offered to buy her food," he said.
"she requested two chicken wings with chilli, and that's what i bought for her.
"station insp lim said that after handing the food which he paid for out of his own pocket to the elderly woman, he offered to accompany her home, but she refused.
through his interactions with her, he realised that she may have dementia as she did not seem to remember her name or where she lived.
a passer-by then informed the officers that the woman lived in a housing board block nearby.
two of station insp lim's colleagues then combed the block to identify the unit where she lives, while station insp lim and one colleague stayed with her.
when they found the flat, the police officers asked the woman's domestic helper to go downstairs to fetch her.
when the domestic helper arrived at the scene, station insp lim told her to remind the elderly woman to wear a mask when she is out.
"i did not raise my voice," he said, refuting allegations made by toc.
station insp lim said he did not expect the incident to be twisted to depict him and his colleagues in a negative manner.
"i felt wronged initially.
but this whole incident shouldn't stop us from helping members of the public and in carrying out our duties," he said.
he also addressed toc's subsequent interviews with the elderly woman, who said the police officers had bullied her.
"i did not take it personally.
i understand that she has dementia and she might not remember what had happened," he said.
on tuesday, mr shanmugam defended the officers involved, noting that station insp lim is "an officer with a heart" who does volunteer work with family service centres in his spare time, and has gone overseas to help when natural disasters struck.
in 2015, station insp lim and eight other officers raised $8,000 from friends, family and colleagues to buy daily necessities and clothing for more than 120 families in kathmandu affected by the nepal earthquake.
when they returned, they decided to formalise the grouping to continue their efforts to help those in need.
today, the group counts 51 police officers as members.
they make monthly contributions to fund food and other necessities to the ang mo kio family service centre and underprivileged people overseas.
body-worn camera footage shows station inspector lim buying the elderly woman a packet of food from a nearby stall (left) and instructing her domestic helper to remind her to wear a mask when she is out.
photos: screengrab from singapore police force/facebook, screengrab from de long/facebook
station insp lim said he hopes the public will not believe everything they see on the internet, but instead try to discern the truth for themselves.
"they (toc) can do what they want, but they should have the responsibility to post something that is factual online," he said.
on thursday, instagram user @nichology, who originally posted the video of station insp lim and the other officers and accused them of bullying the elderly woman, apologised.
"i am sorry to have jumped to conclusions and for the accusatory tone used on my instagram stories about the police officers," he wrote.
he added that he accepts responsibility for his actions and the resulting consequences.
"i understand that it was quick and unfair of me to judge so quickly and harshly.
i would definitely be more careful in future," he said, adding that he did not have any malicious intent nor did he intend to "share fake news".
"while i still believe that citizen journalism is important to provide a community viewpoint, in this case, it also showed that it may cause misjudgments and misunderstandings," he said.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore — the ministry of health (moh) on friday (27 may) confirmed 30 new covid-19 cases in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 61,970. of them, 15 are local cases in the community.
eleven are linked to previous cases, among whom eight have already been placed on quarantine.
fifteen remaining cases are imported, including eight returning singaporeans or permanent residents.
friday marks the 33rd consecutive day with local cases reported.
"amongst the new cases today, 17 are asymptomatic, and were detected from our proactive screening and surveillance, while 13 were symptomatic," said the moh.
the ministry also announced three new clusters.
additionally, it announced the closure of the national university of singapore and immigration & checkpoints authority clusters, as there have been no cases linked to it for the past two incubation periods or 28 days.
this brings the total number of active clusters in singapore to 36. the four unlinked community cases are:a 28-year-old malaysian man employed by i-vic logistic as a delivery rider for mcdonald's (hougang avenue 8) (had not been cross-deployed to other outlets)a 38-year-old female pr who works at sri murugan trading (anchorvale)a 49-year-old male pr who works as a manager at success consultancy (received first dose of vaccine)a 62-year-old singaporean man who is a retiree (fully vaccinated)separately, there is one case is a a family member and household contact of a previously-reported infection but is not part of any active clusters yet.
the 26-year-old singaporean woman works as an administrative staff at singtel and was placed on quarantine on 24 may.
the ministry noted that the number of new cases in the community has decreased from 196 in the week before to 137 in the past week.
the number of unlinked cases in the community has also decreased from 46 in the week before to 23 in the past week.
this story will be updated later.
on thursday, the moh announced that from 11.
59pm on 29 may, singaporeans, prs, and long-term pass holders entering singapore with travel history to victoria state, australia within the last 21 days before departure for singapore, will be subject to an on-arrival covid-19 pcr test, a seven-day stay-home notice at their place of residence, and a covid-19 pcr test before the end of the notice period.
additionally, short-term travellers holding an air travel pass with travel history to victoria state, australia within the last 21 days before departure for singapore, will not be allowed to enter singapore.
from 11.
59pm on 29 may, the pre-departure testing requirement will also be extended to all singapore residents.
this means singaporeans and prs entering or transiting through singapore, except for those who have stayed in lower-risk countries or regions throughout the last 21 days before departure for singapore, will need to present a valid negative covid-19 pcr test taken within 72 hours before departure for singapore.
with 12 more patients discharged from hospitals or community isolation facilities on thursday, 61,372 cases – or 99.
1 per cent of the total – have fully recovered from the infection.
most of the 245 hospitalised cases are stable or improving, while two of them are in critical condition in the intensive care unit.
a total of 291 patients – with mild symptoms or are clinically well but still test positive – are isolated and cared for at community facilities.
apart from the 32 patients who have died from covid-19 complications, 15 others who tested positive for the virus were determined to have died from unrelated causes, including three whose deaths were attributed to a heart attack and another four, whose deaths were attributed to coronary heart disease.
among the 200 confirmed cases reported from 22 to 28 may, 38 cases have tested positive for their serology tests, 111 have tested negative, and 51 serology test results are pending.
stay in the know on-the-go: join yahoo singapore's telegram channel at http://t.
me/yahoosingaporemore singapore stories:'worst kind of harassment': halimah, masagos, muis condemn poll sexualising ustazahwoman charged for not wearing mask at mbs, outside court and elsewherehsa approves pfizer covid vaccine storage in fridge for up to 31 dayscovid: changi airport terminals segregated in bid to curb spread of india variantin a wooded corner of estonia 120 kilometres (75 miles) from the russian border, some 7,000 soldiers are taking part in a nato battleground exercise.
a malaysian woman who entered singapore to carry out illegal cosmetic procedures in 2019 was on friday (28 may) jailed for 10 weeks and fined $5,500.
$6,600「」,$100「」the grave keeps getting deeper for tajuddin abdul rahman.
this article, after disastrous press conference, ex-prasarana chairman probed for alleged corruption, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
find out who stuck with their day jobs and who didn't.
this article, 7 celebrities who married into malaysian royalty, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
one of the first robo-advisors in the now crowded space, stashaway is a name well-known by many.
here's what you can expect when you invest your cash or srs funds with stashaway.
as one of the early players in the robo-advisory space in singapore, stashaway [.
.
. ]
the post stashaway review: goal-getting investments through etfs appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
《!》ut,!bytedance founder zhang yiming, the brains behind tiktok, said he preferred "daydreaming" as he stepped down as head of his own firm last week.
but his departure comes as several of china's once-lauded tech entrepreneurs step aside under increasing scrutiny from a government concerned about their growing power and influence.
the ministry of health (moh) on thursday (27 may) confirmed 24 new covid-19 cases in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 61,940. hdb flat rentals make up a large part of singapore's property market—according to hdb, there are about 60,000 flats currently being rented out.
we examined rental trends across different hdb estates and here's what we found.
「axa」:,6!shares in the parent company of hong kong's pro-democracy apple daily newspaper quadrupled on thursday as trading in them resumed following an eight-day suspension.
australia closed its embassy in afghanistan on friday, highlighting security fears for foreign missions and their local workers as us-led troops pull out of the war-torn country.
two sleek new roads vanish into mountain tunnels high above a sleepy montenegrin village, the unlikely endpoint of a billion-dollar project bankrolled by china that is threatening to derail the tiny country's economy.
!marla40,.
$50,.
an international firefighting effort to put out a huge blaze on a container ship off sri lanka's coast will likely take days, the country's navy chief said thursday, amid mounting fears of a major oil leak.
the package will assist workers and companies hit by the ongoing phase 2 (heightened alert).
hong kong's security chief has warned bankers for jailed media tycoon jimmy lai chee-ying that dealing with his frozen accounts could land them in prison for up to seven years.
when asked whether his move would undermine the reputation of the city as a global financial hub, john lee ka-chiu said on thursday he was following the national security law laid down by beijing last summer that banned acts of subversion, secession, terrorism and collusion with foreign forces.
"i am exercising the power because lai has been charged with two offences of collusion with other countries or external forces to endanger national security," he said.
"it is my duty to specify in my notice to the relevant parties what will be the consequences if they fail to comply with my direction.
"do you have questions about the biggest topics and trends from around the world?
get the answers with scmp knowledge, our new platform of curated content with explainers, faqs, analyses and infographics brought to you by our award-winning team.
the security bureau froze nearly hk$500 million (us$64 million) of lai's assets earlier this month, including his 71 per cent stake in next digital, which publishes the apple daily tabloid, as well as the local bank accounts of three other companies he owns.
the move marked the first time authorities had invoked new powers to freeze or take control of assets of a listed company that could be related to the commission of a national security crime.
but lee said the warning contained in letters sent to an unspecified number of banks after the freezing was only related to assets under suspicion and people carrying out normal business should have nothing to worry about.
lai has been accused of collusion with a foreign country and was also charged with two counts of conspiracy last month.
he is currently serving 14 months in prison for taking part in unauthorised assemblies connected to the anti-government protests of 2019.  jimmy lai asset freeze nothing to do with press freedom, says security chief a spokesman of the hong kong monetary authority, which is responsible for maintaining the city's status as a financial centre, said it would not comment on cases under investigation by police.
but he pointed to the long history that banks had in cooperating with law enforcement agencies in criminal investigations, including freezing and confiscating funds and property under relevant laws, including the national security law.
next digital resumed trading after a 10-day suspension following the freezing of lai's assets and its share price surged 330 per cent from the hk$0.
19 (us$0.
02) at opening to as high as hk$0.
80 (us$0.
10), before falling to hk$0.
28 (us$0.
04) at the close of market.
next digital's management issued a statement on wednesday saying its unaudited bank and cash balances as of march 31 stood at hk$521.
4 million (us$67 million) and its working capital would last a minimum of 18 months from april 1, even without additional funding from lai.
it also said the asset freeze had no impact on a standing shareholder's loan lai had provided to the company and its subsidiaries.
but that assessment was questioned by former city leader leung chun-ying who has been a staunch critic of apple daily but also revealed that he was a minority stakeholder in the company.
leung put the reserves closer to hk$100 million, after subtracting outstanding bank loans totalling hk$93.
6 million, and other liabilities and payables.
"will the bank call the loans?
will suppliers continue to offer credit terms?"
he said on his facebook page.
noting the statement was issued by the board, leung questioned why it had not made its own assessment during the trading suspension, rather than relying on the management's.
ex-hong kong leader has government on the defensive.
is he planning a comeback?
"who is the person in charge of the management?
this is the chief executive officer.
and who is the chief executive officer?
he is cheung kim-hung," he wrote.
the former leader – who is also a vice-chairman of china's top political advisory body – had already lashed out at cheung before next digital's announcement, revealing on wednesday that he had appointed a lawyer to file a formal complaint with law enforcement against the ceo for making "negligent, irresponsible and intentionally misleading" remarks.
leung disputed cheung's suggestion the company's operations and finances would not be affected by the freezing of lai's assets, and demanded a thorough investigation by authorities.
asked about the criticisms, cheung declined to comment.
additional reporting by jeffie lammore from south china morning post:hong kong authorities freeze nearly hk$500 million in assets belonging to media tycoon jimmy laifuture of hong kong's apple daily is on the line after founder jimmy lai's assets are frozen under national security lawthis article national security law: jimmy lai's hong kong bankers warned that handling assets could land them in jail first appeared on south china morning postfor the latest news from the south china morning post download our mobile app.
copyright 2021. ,.
!many of the syrian fighters deployed, sometimes forcibly, in foreign conflict theatres such as libya and nagorno-karabakh are robbed of their wages, said a report released thursday.
the trial of an australian academic detained for more than two years in china on espionage charges began behind closed doors on thursday, with canberra voicing deep concerns over a lack of transparency after its ambassador was denied access.
aye mar sits with her seven children in their yangon kitchen and worries whether their meal of rice and stringy vegetables -- all she can afford in coup-stricken myanmar -- will satisfy their hunger.
「」$1,000!
(25) ,,,,2!rafael nadal, novak djokovic and roger federer, the three most successful men in grand slam tennis history, were on thursday all drawn in the same half of the french open.
five million weary melbourne residents were put back under lockdown on friday, straining local resolve and testing australia's "zero-covid" strategy of smothering outbreaks however small.
investors rejected the responses of us oil giants to climate change wednesday, installing activist board members at exxonmobil and directing chevron to deepen emissions cuts.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore a woman admitted on friday (may 28) to slapping the face of a then eight-year-old girl in an mrt train.
she wanted to stop the girl from leaving the train without apologising for having stepped on her foot.
but the girl had apologised to connie soh, 45, who was talking loudly on her phone at the time and did not hear the apology.
on friday, soh pleaded guilty to one charge of voluntarily causing hurt.
she faces enhanced penalties as the victim is under 14 years old.
the court heard that on july 15 last year, some time before 1.
47pm, the victim accidentally stepped on soh's left foot after boarding the mrt train with her mother at choa chu kang station.
she apologised to soh, who was talking loudly on her phone at the time and did not hear the apology.
soh confronted the victim's mother and asked her why the girl did not apologise for stepping on her foot.
but the mother told soh that her daughter had apologised, and an argument ensued.
when the train reached yew tee station and the girl and her mother proceeded to exit the train carriage, soh slapped the girl on her left cheek to try to prevent her from leaving without apologising.
the girl started to cry, and her mother called the police from the station soon after.
later that day, the mother took her daughter to national university hospital, where a doctor noted that the girl had sustained a left cheek contusion, or bruise.
she was given a two-day medical certificate, with excuse from physical activity until july 19 that year.
deputy public prosecutor joseph gwee urged the court to sentence soh to a fine of at least $5,000, calling soh's response "(an) objectively disproportionate one (that was) committed in a public place".
soh is scheduled for sentencing on june 18.  one other charge of using criminal force to poke the nose of the girl's mother will be taken into account during sentencing.
for voluntarily causing hurt, an offender can be jailed for up to three years, fined up to $5,000, or both.
soh faces double this maximum penalty as the girl was under 14. join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore: singapore will tighten border control measures for those with a travel history to australia's victoria state, after a spike in covid-19 cases there, said the ministry of health (moh) on thursday (may 27).
from 11.
59pm on saturday, short-term travellers holding an air travel pass with travel history to victoria within the last 21 days before departing for singapore will not be allowed to enter the country.
singapore citizens, permanent residents and long-term pass holders with travel history to victoria within the last 21 days before departure will be subject to an on-arrival covid-19 polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test, a seven-day stay-home notice at their place of residence, and a covid-19 pcr test before the end of the stay-home notice period.
all other travellers departing from australia who have been in australia (excluding victoria state) in the last 21 days prior to travel will continue to be subject to a covid-19 test upon arrival at the airport, in lieu of their stay-home notice.
"given the increased cases observed in victoria state, australia, we will be tightening border control measures for travellers with travel history to (the state)," moh said.
the health ministry said it will continue to adjust singapore's border measures to manage the risk of importation and transmission to the community as the global covid-19 situation evolves.
victoria state will enter a one-week lockdown from 11.
59pm on thursday as authorities scramble to contain a "highly infectious strain of the virus".
a fresh cluster of infections detected in the state capital melbourne early this week more than doubled to 26 on thursday after 12 new cases overnight.
officials have traced the cluster the first in the state in more than three months to an overseas traveller infected with a variant first found in india.
contact tracers have since identified more than 10,000 primary and secondary contacts who would need to quarantine, test and self isolate.
authorities are "dealing with a highly infectious strain of the virus, a variant of concern, which is running faster than we have ever recorded", said victoria state acting premier james merlino.
"unless something drastic happens, this will become increasingly uncontrollable," he said.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
kuala lumpur malaysia's increasingly deadly coronavirus surge is stretching its medical resources, with critical wards filling up and some patients being turned away or experiencing long waits.
this is taking place even as more spaces are being converted to covid-19 wards.
non-covid-19 patients are also feeling the pain, as capacity for their needs has been reduced, with more priority being given to coronavirus patients.
the authorities have said the country, which now has more cases per million people than india, has yet to reach the stage where health workers have to triage selecting patients for care based on their chances of survival.
but there are signs that families of non-covid-19 patients are beginning to have to make such decisions about their loved ones amid the crisis.
a healthcare worker at a key hospital in kuala lumpur said that some patients requiring critical care have had to be turned away.
"we try to accommodate all, but we don't always have ventilators and beds," the front-liner, speaking on condition of anonymity, told the straits times (st).
he related an incident where a critically ill non-covid-19 patient's family was told to opt between taking their loved one back home to die or keeping the patient in the hospital with the same outcome.
families of covid-19 patients are also facing a struggle to secure critical care beds for their loved ones.
a professional who recently lost her 85-year-old father to coronavirus-related complications said that when he was diagnosed with covid-19, it took the family more than 12 hours to secure a bed for him at a semi-government hospital in selangor, as the beds were full at all the hospitals that treated covid-19 patients needing critical care.
the 51-year-old, who wished to be known only as jane, told st: "the doctor who was caring for my father called every hospital in the city to try and get a bed for him once the test result came back positive.
it was a stressful time for us because he was also a dialysis patient.
"the northern state of kedah which has seen a drastic surge in the past weeks has said that it might no longer admit chronically ill patients with little hope into intensive care units (icu), whether they are covid-19 patients or not.
dr mohd hayati othman, the state's health and local government executive councillor, said: "i feel heavy-hearted on whether to announce this, but i have to say it: in certain cases, doctors have to choose whom to send to the icu, and if the patient is too chronically ill and has no hope, we won't admit them to the icu.
"jane, whose father was very ill when he was in hospital, said: "halfway through his treatment, the doctor treating him called me up and hinted that he (the father) might be taking an icu bed that is sorely needed for someone else.
"malaysia is currently in the third week of a month-long lockdown the third since the pandemic to deal with the rising infection numbers.
however, the lockdown has shown no signs of easing the caseload, with the country consistently breaching record infection figures and record deaths in the past week.
a record number of patients are admitted into intensive care units.
malaysia has, for the past week, been reporting more than 50 deaths a day from the coronavirus.
photo: epa-efe
in the central districts around the capital kuala lumpur, the rate of icu usage for covid-19 cases has already exceeded capacity at 113 per cent.
figures released last week showed that 377 icu beds were taken up by covid-19 patients, despite only 334 beds being initially designated for such patients.
this has left just over 70 vacant icu beds for non-covid-19 patients across 12 hospitals in malaysia's most densely populated region.
nationwide, 91 per cent of all designated covid-19 icu beds were taken up.
as at thursday, malaysia has 771 covid-19 patients in icus, with more than half of them requiring ventilator support the highest number recorded to date.
the country has, for the past week, been reporting more than 50 deaths a day from covid-19, reaching an all-time high of 61 deaths on sunday.
on friday, malaysia set a new record of 8,290 new infections, the fourth consecutive day of record infections.
active cases have reached 72,823, the highest ever recorded.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
yangon: aye mar sits with her seven children in their yangon kitchen and worries whether their meal of rice and stringy vegetables all she can afford in coup-stricken myanmar will satisfy their hunger.
the national economy and banking system have been paralysed since a military power-grab which pushed civilian leader aung san suu kyi out of office in february.
livelihoods have been lost after strikes and factory closures, fuel prices have shot up and those lucky enough to have bank savings face day-long queues to withdraw their cash.
venturing out in public to earn a living has also become a safety hazard against the backdrop of an indiscriminate and brutal crackdown on dissent that has killed more than 800 civilians, according to a local monitoring group.
in a country which in normal times exports rice, beans and fruit, millions will go hungry in the coming months, the world food programme has warned.
"we have to feed our children so they don't starve," aye mar says, sitting barefoot in the commercial capital, a baby swinging in a hammock overhead.
the 33-year-old is out of work, along with her husband who has been forced to take any odd job on offer including digging septic tanks.
food vendor wah wah, 37, says price increases since the coup mean customers can no longer afford something as modest as a bowl of dried fish.
"i can't sell it because customers cannot afford to buy it .
.
.
even if i sell it at 500 kyats (us$0.
33) per bowl," she told afp.
"everyone has to spend money carefully to be safe because no one has jobs.
we live with fear because we don't know what will happen.
""we are in trouble"father-of-three win naing tun, 26, said those who could previously afford to eat pork regularly have been forced to turn to fish paste and vegetables.
and those who survived on that limited diet before "now can only afford to eat white rice with salt", he told afp.
price hikes have hit remote areas particularly hard near the chinese border in kachin state, rice is almost 50 per cent more expensive, according to the wfp.
the cost of transporting produce from farms to cities has also jumped after an estimated 30 per cent fuel price hike since the coup.
the wfp estimates that within the next six months, as many as 3.
4 million more people will go hungry in myanmar and it is poised to triple its emergency food assistance.
a grassroots community food donation programme is proving to be in high demand in yangon, myanmar's commercial capital.
"they are happy when we donate food.
some even cry," volunteer may, not her real name, told afp.
ni aye, 51, said she and her husband now have no income at all and depend on handouts for the food they eat.
"we are in trouble .
.
.
if these conditions continue we will starve," she told afp.
aung kyaw moe, 47, is considering returning to his home village after the yangon factory he worked in shut down.
he told afp he had no money saved up and was in despair over how to support his family of nine, who are squatting illegally with him in the commercial capital.
"everything is outside our control," he told afp.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore — a man who was arrested for theft defecated into a paper cup while in a police lock-up and then threw his faeces at an auxiliary policeman, a court heard.
at the state courts on friday (28 may), the 34-year-old culprit sulaiman abdul majid maricar pleaded guilty to one charge of using criminal force on a public servant and five other counts including theft and housebreaking to commit theft.
he will be sentenced at a later date pending a report on his suitability for preventive detention, which is a sentencing option meant to protect the public from recalcitrant offenders, who must serve a jail term of between seven and 20 years in full with no reduction given for good behaviour.
on 13 october last year, sulaiman was arrested for stealing from a vehicle.
he was placed in a lock-up at the woodlands police division headquarters.
it was his second time being arrested for theft from a vehicle in a week.
he had been arrested on 9 october and released on bail the next day after stealing three handphones and a power bank of unknown value along with a cash card with a stored value of about $40 from a rag-and-bone man's lorry.
while in the lock-up on 14 october, sulaiman was given lunch and a paper cup containing a drink.
he later defecated into the paper cup and kept his faeces in it.
at about 6.
30pm, an auxiliary policeman went to sulaiman's cell to pass him his dinner.
but the latter took the paper cup containing his faeces and threw it at the officer, causing the excrement to land on the cop's uniform, over his torso, his pants and his boots.
the officer asked sulaiman to explain his actions but the latter simply ignored him.
the auxiliary policeman then reported the incident to his superior and went to clean himself up.
out on bail just a week later, sulaiman and his then girlfriend nurul natasha roslan, 26, stole a $7,000 motorcycle from an open carpark in marine crescent at about 1am on 21 october.
its owner had accidentally left his keys in the ignition as he was tired.
he had also left his helmet on the motorbike.
at the time, sulaiman was under a 25-year driving ban which took effect from april last year.
he also rode the bike without valid insurance policy.
then on 23 october, at around midnight, sulaiman and natasha broke into a food centre in tai seng, kim chuan eating house, and made off with $430 from the cash register of a drink stall.
the couple were arrested at a hotel at about 1.
45am the next day.
the motorcycle they had stolen three days earlier was found parked at the hotel and returned to its owner.
in 2009, sulaiman was also convicted of housebreaking at night.
the maximum punishment for housebreaking is up to 10 years' jail along and a fine.
male repeat offenders who are below 50 are liable to be caned.
more singapore news:stay in the know on-the-go: join yahoo singapore's telegram channel at http://t.
me/yahoosingaporeother singapore stories:of 30 new covid cases in singapore, 15 in communitymother who had postnatal depression committed suicide with baby: state coroner'worst kind of harassment': halimah, masagos, muis condemn poll sexualising ustazahman broke into house for cigarettes, kissed sleeping neighboursingapore's jem/westgate cluster grows to 60 covid casesin a wooded corner of estonia 120 kilometres (75 miles) from the russian border, some 7,000 soldiers are taking part in a nato battleground exercise.
a malaysian woman who entered singapore to carry out illegal cosmetic procedures in 2019 was on friday (28 may) jailed for 10 weeks and fined $5,500.
$6,600「」,$100「」the grave keeps getting deeper for tajuddin abdul rahman.
this article, after disastrous press conference, ex-prasarana chairman probed for alleged corruption, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
find out who stuck with their day jobs and who didn't.
this article, 7 celebrities who married into malaysian royalty, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
one of the first robo-advisors in the now crowded space, stashaway is a name well-known by many.
here's what you can expect when you invest your cash or srs funds with stashaway.
as one of the early players in the robo-advisory space in singapore, stashaway [.
.
. ]
the post stashaway review: goal-getting investments through etfs appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
smart,5%!$1,600,!bytedance founder zhang yiming, the brains behind tiktok, said he preferred "daydreaming" as he stepped down as head of his own firm last week.
but his departure comes as several of china's once-lauded tech entrepreneurs step aside under increasing scrutiny from a government concerned about their growing power and influence.
the ministry of health (moh) on friday (27 may) confirmed 30 new covid-19 cases in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 61,970. hdb flat rentals make up a large part of singapore's property market—according to hdb, there are about 60,000 flats currently being rented out.
we examined rental trends across different hdb estates and here's what we found.
「axa」:,6!shares in the parent company of hong kong's pro-democracy apple daily newspaper quadrupled on thursday as trading in them resumed following an eight-day suspension.
australia closed its embassy in afghanistan on friday, highlighting security fears for foreign missions and their local workers as us-led troops pull out of the war-torn country.
two sleek new roads vanish into mountain tunnels high above a sleepy montenegrin village, the unlikely endpoint of a billion-dollar project bankrolled by china that is threatening to derail the tiny country's economy.
《!》ut,!an international firefighting effort to put out a huge blaze on a container ship off sri lanka's coast will likely take days, the country's navy chief said thursday, amid mounting fears of a major oil leak.
the package will assist workers and companies hit by the ongoing phase 2 (heightened alert).
hong kong's security chief has warned bankers for jailed media tycoon jimmy lai chee-ying that dealing with his frozen accounts could land them in prison for up to seven years.
when asked whether his move would undermine the reputation of the city as a global financial hub, john lee ka-chiu said on thursday he was following the national security law laid down by beijing last summer that banned acts of subversion, secession, terrorism and collusion with foreign forces.
"i am exercising the power because lai has been charged with two offences of collusion with other countries or external forces to endanger national security," he said.
"it is my duty to specify in my notice to the relevant parties what will be the consequences if they fail to comply with my direction.
"do you have questions about the biggest topics and trends from around the world?
get the answers with scmp knowledge, our new platform of curated content with explainers, faqs, analyses and infographics brought to you by our award-winning team.
the security bureau froze nearly hk$500 million (us$64 million) of lai's assets earlier this month, including his 71 per cent stake in next digital, which publishes the apple daily tabloid, as well as the local bank accounts of three other companies he owns.
the move marked the first time authorities had invoked new powers to freeze or take control of assets of a listed company that could be related to the commission of a national security crime.
but lee said the warning contained in letters sent to an unspecified number of banks after the freezing was only related to assets under suspicion and people carrying out normal business should have nothing to worry about.
lai has been accused of collusion with a foreign country and was also charged with two counts of conspiracy last month.
he is currently serving 14 months in prison for taking part in unauthorised assemblies connected to the anti-government protests of 2019.  jimmy lai asset freeze nothing to do with press freedom, says security chief a spokesman of the hong kong monetary authority, which is responsible for maintaining the city's status as a financial centre, said it would not comment on cases under investigation by police.
but he pointed to the long history that banks had in cooperating with law enforcement agencies in criminal investigations, including freezing and confiscating funds and property under relevant laws, including the national security law.
next digital resumed trading after a 10-day suspension following the freezing of lai's assets and its share price surged 330 per cent from the hk$0.
19 (us$0.
02) at opening to as high as hk$0.
80 (us$0.
10), before falling to hk$0.
28 (us$0.
04) at the close of market.
next digital's management issued a statement on wednesday saying its unaudited bank and cash balances as of march 31 stood at hk$521.
4 million (us$67 million) and its working capital would last a minimum of 18 months from april 1, even without additional funding from lai.
it also said the asset freeze had no impact on a standing shareholder's loan lai had provided to the company and its subsidiaries.
but that assessment was questioned by former city leader leung chun-ying who has been a staunch critic of apple daily but also revealed that he was a minority stakeholder in the company.
leung put the reserves closer to hk$100 million, after subtracting outstanding bank loans totalling hk$93.
6 million, and other liabilities and payables.
"will the bank call the loans?
will suppliers continue to offer credit terms?"
he said on his facebook page.
noting the statement was issued by the board, leung questioned why it had not made its own assessment during the trading suspension, rather than relying on the management's.
ex-hong kong leader has government on the defensive.
is he planning a comeback?
"who is the person in charge of the management?
this is the chief executive officer.
and who is the chief executive officer?
he is cheung kim-hung," he wrote.
the former leader – who is also a vice-chairman of china's top political advisory body – had already lashed out at cheung before next digital's announcement, revealing on wednesday that he had appointed a lawyer to file a formal complaint with law enforcement against the ceo for making "negligent, irresponsible and intentionally misleading" remarks.
leung disputed cheung's suggestion the company's operations and finances would not be affected by the freezing of lai's assets, and demanded a thorough investigation by authorities.
asked about the criticisms, cheung declined to comment.
additional reporting by jeffie lammore from south china morning post:hong kong authorities freeze nearly hk$500 million in assets belonging to media tycoon jimmy laifuture of hong kong's apple daily is on the line after founder jimmy lai's assets are frozen under national security lawthis article national security law: jimmy lai's hong kong bankers warned that handling assets could land them in jail first appeared on south china morning postfor the latest news from the south china morning post download our mobile app.
copyright 2021.
51930megag,&3!
kanu,,bt21!8.
5~many of the syrian fighters deployed, sometimes forcibly, in foreign conflict theatres such as libya and nagorno-karabakh are robbed of their wages, said a report released thursday.
the trial of an australian academic detained for more than two years in china on espionage charges began behind closed doors on thursday, with canberra voicing deep concerns over a lack of transparency after its ambassador was denied access.
aye mar sits with her seven children in their yangon kitchen and worries whether their meal of rice and stringy vegetables -- all she can afford in coup-stricken myanmar -- will satisfy their hunger.
,,,.
rafael nadal, novak djokovic and roger federer, the three most successful men in grand slam tennis history, were on thursday all drawn in the same half of the french open.
five million weary melbourne residents were put back under lockdown on friday, straining local resolve and testing australia's "zero-covid" strategy of smothering outbreaks however small.
investors rejected the responses of us oil giants to climate change wednesday, installing activist board members at exxonmobil and directing chevron to deepen emissions cuts.
taipei: germany's biontech asked taiwan to remove the word "country" from an announcement they planned to make on a covid-19 vaccine sale to the island, its health minister said on thursday (may 27), giving details of the deal whose axing was blamed on china by taipei.
taiwan and china are engaged in an escalating war of words after beijing offered the shots to the chinese-claimed island via shanghai fosun pharmaceutical group, which has a contract to sell them in greater china.
taiwan health minister chen shih-chung told a daily news briefing the government had signed and sent back a "final contract" agreed with biontech after months of negotiations, and the two sides were on the verge of issuing a press release on jan 8. but four hours later "biontech suddenly sent a letter, saying they strongly recommend us to change the word 'our country' in the chinese version of the press release", chen said.
the government agreed to tweak the wording to "taiwan" on the same day, he added.
a week later, chen said, his government was informed by biontech the completion of the deal will be delayed due to a "revaluation of global vaccine supply and adjusted timelines".
"it's crystal clear to me that the contract was finalised," he added.
"there's no problem within the contract.
the problem was something outside of the contract," he said, without elaborating.
biontech declined to comment.
china considers taiwan its own territory and strongly objects to any references that imply taiwan is a separate country.
chen's comments came a day after taiwan president tsai ing-wen directly accused china of blocking the deal with biontech.
the german company, which sells its vaccine in partnership with pfizer, declined to comment on tsai's remarks.
taiwan's medical system is coming under increasing strain due to a spike in domestic infections with only about 1 per cent of the population of more than 23 million vaccinated.
china has repeatedly said its vaccine offer via biontech's chinese sales agent fosun is sincere and taiwan should not put up political roadblocks.
taiwan does not believe china is sincere in offering it vaccines and thinks beijing is launching a "political warfare" against the island, officials briefed on the matter told reuters.
taiwan announced 667 new domestic covid-19 cases on thursday, including 266 cases added to previous days' totals.
it has reported 6,761 infections since the pandemic began, including 59 deaths.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
shares of tycoon jimmy lai's next digital ltd were set to surge 142per cent on resumption of trade on thursday, a week after authorities froze assets of its jailed owner under a sweeping national security law imposed on the financial hub by beijing.
hong kong  -shares in jailed tycoon jimmy lai's next digital ltd soared on thursday, the first day of trading after a suspension of longer than a week following a freeze in the pro-democracy activist's assets under the national security law.
in a late wednesday statement, the media publisher said it had enough working capital for at least 18 months from april 1 without additional funding from lai, its controlling shareholder.
shares opened 141.
9per cent higher at hkus$0.
45, the highest since december 2020, when lai was charged under the security law imposed by china earlier that year.
they then extended gains to hkus$0.
80, the highest since august 2020, when lai was first arrested and national security police raided the newsroom of his apple daily newspaper.
the stock can be highly volatile as trade is dominated by retail investors, and its spikes are often a result of buyers' showing support for lai and his pro-democracy publications.
"there are a lot of investors who are willing to speculate in this stock, it's crazy," said wealthy securities managing director louis tse.
"i don't think the moves are based on any kind of financial fundaments for the stock.
"hong kong's national security department had notified next digital's chief executive, cheung kim hung, that lai was prohibited from dealing in assets, including shares in the listed company and bank accounts of three firms directly or indirectly wholly owned by lai, the publisher said in a statement late on wednesday.
"the board does not expect the issue of the notice to have an immediate negative effect on the financial situation or operations of the group," cheung said in the statement.
next digital's shares were suspended on may 17. apple daily, a pro-democracy tabloid published by next digital, said at the time the group had sufficient working capital for nine to 10 months.
on wednesday, next digital said its unaudited bank and cash balances amounted to hkus$521.
4 million (us$67.
17 million) as of march 31.  it added that it expected cost savings in the longer run as a result of a recent decision to stop publishing taiwan apple daily in print.
next digital, in which lai owns a 71.
26per cent stake, also said it did not expect the notice from national security authorities to affect the trading volume of the shares in the company.
lai, a staunch beijing critic seen as a traitor in china, was sentenced to 14 months in prison for taking part in unauthorised assemblies during anti-government protests in hong kong in 2019, and is among the most high-profile arrests made under the security law.
he faces three more charges, including collusion with a foreign country.
lai is due in court on friday, where he will hear a sentence for another unauthorised assembly, on oct.  1, 2019 china's national day.
he had pleaded guilty.
(us$1 = 7.
7629 hong kong dollars)(reporting by donny kwok; writing by marius zaharia; editing by gerry doyle)it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
as of wednesday noon (26 may), the ministry of health (moh) has preliminarily confirmed an additional 26 cases of covid-19 infection in singapore.
this brings the total number of infection cases to 61,916. there are 24 new cases of locally transmitted covid-19 infection.
21 are linked to previous cases, amongst which 14 have already been placed on quarantine, and seven were detected through surveillance.
"the remaining 3 are currently unlinked," said moh.
"based on our investigations so far, 23 are in the community, and 1 resides in a dormitory.
"in addition, there are two new imported cases, who had been placed on stay-home notice (shn) upon arrival in singapore.
the ministry will share further updates in its press release tonight.
according to last night's press release, there are currently 250 confirmed cases who are still in hospital.
of these, most are stable or improving, and two are in critical condition in the intensive care unit (icu).
279 are isolated and cared for at community facilities.
these are those who have mild symptoms, or are clinically well but still test positive for covid-19.
32 have passed away from complications due to covid-19 infection.
© 2006 2021 the online citizen© 2006 2021 the online citizen
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
sydney (reuters, afp) australia's victoria state reported four new locally acquired covid-19 cases on friday (may 28), the first day of a one-week hard lockdown imposed to contain a growing coronavirus outbreak in state capital melbourne.
victoria, australia's second most populous state, entered the lockdown on thursday night, due to run until june 3, forcing its near seven million residents to remain home except for essential business.
the state reported 12 locally acquired cases a day earlier.
crowds have been banned from sporting events and people ordered to stay home except for work, exercise, shopping for essentials, providing care and getting vaccinated.
in melbourne, five million weary residents returned to lockdown on friday, straining local resolve and testing australia's "zero-covid" strategy of smothering outbreaks however small.
as authorities said the cluster of positive cases had grown to 39, streets in australia's second city emptied out for the fourth time since the pandemic began.
"it's just very difficult," resident gavin catt told afp.
"this lockdown is affecting us.
many families and friends can't work. "
melbournians have been ordered to stay at home for seven days to stall transmission and buy the authorities time to investigate how the virus again jumped from hotel quarantine into the community.
the outbreak is believed to have begun when a traveller infected with the indian variant returned to australia, but victoria's acting state premier james merlino called for military help with the investigation.
mr merlino on thursday blamed sluggish vaccine rollout and hotel quarantine failures for the latest outbreak.
"if we had an alternative to hotel quarantine for this particular variant of concern, we would not be here today," he said.
it is believed to be the 17th time in six months that the virus has leaked out of makeshift hotel quarantine facilities, which are now facing tough scrutiny.
fingers are also being pointed at australia's conservative federal government for the slow rate of vaccinations, which threatens to reverse the country's early virus success.
australia has recorded 30,000 covid-19 cases since the pandemic began – with a large portion in hotel quarantine – in a country of 25 million people.
but only 2 per cent of australians have so far been fully vaccinated.
"i'm from new york originally so i feel like we've had a really good go of it here in australia in terms of how many people have gotten sick," said mr david gonzalez.
"so i guess i'm willing to accept a bit of a slow rollout but if these things happen more often, they just have to get more vaccines in the country.
"the australian olympic committee said it was "assessing the impacts" of the melbourne lockdown on athletes completing their vaccinations in the city of 5 million.
a protracted lockdown to control a second wave outbreak in victoria last year forced more than a dozen melbourne-based sports teams to play away from home for several months to complete their seasons.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
hong kong: jailed hong kong media tycoon and beijing critic jimmy lai was given a new prison sentence of 14 months on friday (may 28) over his role in an unauthorised assembly on oct 1, 2019, during one of the city's pro-democracy rallies that year.
this month, lai, who is serving a 14-month sentence for participating in similar demonstrations on aug 18 and aug 31, 2019, and nine other activists, pleaded guilty in district court to organising an unauthorised assembly.
he has been in jail since december after being denied bail in a separate national security trial.
he faces three charges under the new law, introduced by china in 2020 in response to the protests, including collusion with a foreign country.
lai's repeated arrests have drawn criticism from western governments and international rights groups, who raised concerns over waning freedoms in the global financial hub, including freedom of speech and assembly.
beijing sees him as a traitor and an anti-china instigator.
china says the sweeping security law, which punishes anything beijing considers as subversion, secession, terrorism and collusion with foreign forces with up to life in prison, was vital to restore stability and prosperity.
judge amanda woodcock, who handed lai his previous illegal assembly sentence in april, delivered the sentence on friday.
she said part of the new sentence would be served consecutively, meaning lai faces a total of 20 months in prison so far.
there were major clashes on oct 1, china's national day, including a live round shot by a policeman at a protester swinging a long stick, the first use of a handgun after months of demonstrations.
"they did call for a peaceful, rational and non-violent procession but how naive and unrealistic was that considering what was happening on a daily basis was the opposite," woodcock said.
"this is not with hindsight.
the risk was very real every day at that time.
"the other nine defendants, including activists figo chan, lee cheuk-yan, albert ho and leung kwok-hung, who is known in hong kong as long hair, were sentenced to up to 18 months.
two received suspended sentences.
"your honour, for over 40 years i have strived for democratic reform in china," lee told the court this week during one of the hearings.
"this is my unrequited love, the love for my country with such a heavy heart.
"activist tsang kin-shing, present at the court, condemned the "heavy" sentencing received by long hair, his colleague in the league of social democrats.
"we're all trapped now in a prison city where freedom of expression is not allowed," tsang told reuters.
the sentence comes two weeks after authorities froze assets belonging to lai, including bank accounts and his 71.
26 per cent stake in media publisher next digital.
hong kong's security chief sent letters to lai and branches of hsbc and citibank this month threatening up to seven years in prison for any dealings with the billionaire's accounts in the city, according to documents seen by reuters.
the moves could imperil any attempt by the democracy activist to move offshore assets back home to prop up next digital's troubled apple daily tabloid, a staunch government critic, one of lai's financial advisers said.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
hong kong • the prediction was vintage jack ma, as provocative as it was prescient.
"this is the era of the internet," the chinese billionaire proclaimed in october 2013, just weeks after his plan to take alibaba group holding public in hong kong had been scuttled by regulators.
"it no longer belongs to li ka-shing.
"mr ma's dig at the famed hong kong tycoon raised plenty of eyebrows at the time, but few would disagree with him now.
the past few years have seen a remarkable shift in fortunes between china's tech-savvy moguls and their old-school hong kong counterparts a trend that shows few signs of fading any time soon.
the combined wealth of china's 10 richest people has surged threefold since 2016 to us$425 billion (s$563 billion), according to the bloomberg billionaires index.
for hong kong, it doubled to us$218 billion during the same period.
mr li, once asia's richest person, is now ranked no.
13, several spots below mr ma, who eventually listed alibaba in new york in 2014. the changes underscore the fading relevance of hong kong businessmen who built their empires on real estate, ports, infrastructure, telecommunications, aviation and retail.
at their peak, when the former british colony was the indispensable gateway to a rapidly developing mainland china, mr li and his peers were courted by beijing for their business acumen and access to overseas capital.
these days their political clout is waning and their businesses are increasingly viewed by investors as stale.
what's more, hong kong's future as a financial hub is facing an existential threat as china's communist party chips away at the "one country, two systems" framework that has underpinned the city's success for decades.
one consequence has been a dramatic slide in the stock market valuations for hong kong's biggest conglomerates.
over the past five years, five of the city's top groups ck hutchison holdings, new world development, henderson land development, sun hung kai properties and wharf holdings have consistently traded at deep discounts to their net assets.
their shares now fetch just 0.
5 times book value on average, versus 10 for the five companies controlled by some of china's richest tycoons, data compiled by bloomberg show.
the main businesses of the large hong kong companies don't have much growth.
.
.
investors prefer to focus on growth more than on a company's value.
"the main businesses of the large hong kong companies don't have much growth," said mr andy wong, founding partner at lw asset management in the city.
"investors prefer to focus on growth more than on a company's value," he said, adding that technology-driven sectors are attractive, especially after the pandemic.
while private family offices of some of the city's tycoons have pivoted to high-growth investments, their listed businesses have been slow to catch up.
on the other hand, their counterparts across the border have leveraged technology to provide a range of consumer services and create wealth.
chinese tycoons have also benefited from the us$14.
3 trillion economy's quick recovery from covid.
china was the only major economy to expand last year, while hong kong saw back-to-back contractions in 2019 and 2020. most of china's richest billionaires come from the tech industry, including tencent holdings' pony ma, bytedance founder zhang yiming and netease's william ding.
the wealth of zhong shanshan, china's richest person and founder of bottled water giant nongfu spring, is almost us$69 billion, more than double that of mr li's.
many of hong kong's business empires owe their success to government policies that encouraged only a small group of deep-pocketed developers to bid at auctions of land parcels, a system that turned hong kong into the world's most expensive property market.
the windfall from rising prices allowed the tycoons to diversify into utilities, retail, ports and infrastructure.
but that formula has been difficult to replicate in larger markets like mainland china due to high capital requirements, local competition and regulatory barriers, said mr richard harris, founder of hong kong-based port shelter investment management.
the result is that many of the city's tycoons have focused on defending their current turf rather than expanding into new businesses, mr harris said.
"many of them are quite happy making sure they don't lose" what they have, he added.
yet even that has proven difficult in recent years as hong kong's economy was battered by anti-government protests and the pandemic.
sun hung kai properties, the developer led by billionaire brothers raymond and thomas kwok, reported the biggest decline in underlying profit since 2013 for the year ended june.
swire pacific, one of city's two centuries-old british trading firms, recorded an underlying loss last year, the first since listing in 1959.  its flagship cathay pacific airways is struggling despite a government-led rescue.
ck hutchison, the flagship of the diversified empire mr li built after his family fled to hong kong from the mainland as refugees in 1940, saw its first profit drop since a revamp of the conglomerate in 2015. as tensions rise between china and the west, the ck group is facing headwinds overseas.
australia blocked it from acquiring a local gas pipeline operator over national security concerns in 2018. some of hong kong's conglomerates have started looking further afield for growth opportunities.
new world development, which is into infrastructure building, hotels and shopping malls, is accelerating its expansion into insurance, health care and education in mainland china.
chief executive officer adrian cheng has said he wants to grow the non-property service businesses.
much of the effort "revolves around non-traditional businesses", a spokesman said.
swire pacific is investing in healthcare groups in mainland china.
jardine matheson holdings, the owner of luxury hotel group mandarin oriental international, is partnering with private equity firm hillhouse capital management to look for investment opportunities in greater china and south-east asia.
representatives for sun hung kai declined to comment, while ck group and wharf did not respond to requests for comment.
swire said the group's financial strength and ability to invest remain strong, and is looking at new sectors.
henderson land said it has been diversifying from property, with a strong presence in hong kong and china, and has been incorporating sustainable technologies.
mr li's personal investment vehicle, horizons ventures, has been investing in plant-based food, renewable energy and digital services.
the firm's early bet in zoom video communications surged to us$11 billion last year during the pandemic, or one-third of mr li's wealth.
he was also an early backer of facebook, spotify technology and siri.
the post-pandemic recovery will be crucial for hong kong's tycoons to consider similar bets on emerging industries, according to mr falcon chan, a partner at deloitte china.
"it's critical to think about what's the next big bet," he said.
"what some of these big guys do in the next one or two years will have a tremendous impact if they want to pivot.
"bloombergjoin st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore an $800 million support package that includes enhanced wage subsidies under the jobs support scheme (jss) and rental relief will be rolled out to help businesses and workers cope with the impact of tightened covid-19 restrictions.
announcing the measures on friday (may 28), finance minister lawrence wong said affected gyms, fitness studios and performing arts and arts education centres will get 50 per cent of salary support for local employees under the jss.
sectors that do not have to suspend operations but are significantly affected by the measures will get 30 per cent of jss subsidies.
this will help retailers, personal care service providers, museums, art galleries, historical sites, cinemas, indoor playgrounds and other family entertainment centres.
but supermarkets, convenience stores and online retailers will not be eligible for the enhanced wage support.
the enhanced payouts, which are based on wages paid in april to june this year, will be disbursed in september, said the ministry of finance (mof) in a statement.
employers who put local employees on mandatory no-pay leave or retrench them will not be eligible for jss payouts for those employees, the ministry added.
other businesses that wish to appeal for enhanced jss support can do so at this website.
the various support measures for those affected by the phase two (heightened alert) restrictions from may 16 to june 13 will not require an additional draw on past reserves.
instead, they will be funded through a reallocation of spending, as some development expenditure can be capitalised under the recently passed significant infrastructure government loan act (singa) bill, mof said.
a supplementary supply bill will be tabled at the next parliament sitting in july to effect the reallocation of spending.
speaking at a virtual press conference, mr wong said the tightened measures have also been helping to curb the spread of the virus.
"therefore, we do not think there is a need for further tightening in our overall posture," he said, adding that the multi-ministry task force on covid-19 will give a fuller update at a press conference on monday.
if there are further extensions of the restrictions beyond june 13, mof will consider whether support measures can be similarly extended, he added.
mr wong, who co-chairs the task force, said the financial support package handed out this time round is not on the same scale as those allocated last year.
this is because most parts of the economy are still operating, and there are also more government schemes, like the jobs growth incentive, to support new jobs and opportunities.
last year, close to $100 billion was dedicated to covid-19 support measures over five budgets, with up to $52 billion drawn from the reserves.
"our circumstances today are very different compared with last year.
and under such a circumstance, i don't think we should be going to the president to seek permission to draw on our past reserves" said the minister, adding that singapore must expect to run into situations like this from time to time, when restrictions need to be tightened temporarily to control the spread of the virus.
"so we will have to learn to adapt to such situations, using our own resources rather than to dip into our past reserves, and it's on that basis that we are able to set aside some funds for this package," said mr wong.
rental relief will also be given to small and medium-sized enterprises as well as eligible non-profit organisations in commercial properties, while eligible lower- to middle-income workers and self-employed workers whose income have been affected by the measures can receive a one-off payout of up to $700 under a new covid-19 recovery grant (temporary).
under the current covid-19 measures, services such as dining in, facials and saunas are barred from may 16 to june 13, while tighter capacity caps apply to retail spaces such as shopping centres and showrooms.
social gatherings are capped at two people.
indoor sports facilities such as gyms, too, face tougher operating restrictions from may 8 to june 13 including having to close, unless they offer only low-intensity activities, where participants are masked and do not share common equipment.
some support has been given to businesses and workers to cushion the impact of the measures, but companies have sought more help from landlords and the government.
for instance, food and beverage businesses will get 50 per cent wage subsidies under the jss during the period for which dining in is prohibited, up from 10 per cent.
hawkers and coffee shop stallholders who are tenants of government agencies will also get a one-month rental waiver.
at least five mall operators have also pledged to help tenants hit by the stricter measures imposed on may 16, including by offering rental rebates.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore a police officer who was accused of bullying an elderly woman in yishun has spoken out, saying that while the accusations were upsetting at first, he will not stop helping members of the public when duty calls.
station inspector jeff lim kok hwee, 45, a deputy team leader at yishun south neighbourhood police centre, shared his side of the story, adding that he is glad that "the truth is out".
on may 19, the singapore police force refuted allegations circulating online that four police officers, including station insp lim, had told the elderly woman off for not wearing her mask.
the social media posts claimed that the officers had abused their authority in dealing with the elderly woman.
two days later, the fake news law was invoked by home affairs minister k.  shanmugam, requiring an instagram user as well as the singapore uncensored and the online citizen asia (toc) websites to carry correction notices for their posts on the incident.
but after toc doubled down on its claims, the police released two clips of body-worn camera footage on tuesday (may 25), taken from the officers involved in the incident.
[embed]https://fb.
watch/5mjpvey2za/[/embed][embed]https://fb.
watch/5mjqs2v64l/[/embed]the footage showed station insp lim buying the woman a packet of food from a nearby stall and instructing the woman's domestic helper to remind her to wear a mask when she is out.
speaking to the media on friday, station insp lim said he was called to the scene on the evening of may 17 after receiving a call from a member of the public about an elderly woman who appeared to be lost and was not wearing a mask.
when he arrived with three of his colleagues, he said he tried to make her comfortable by sitting down to chat with her.
[[nid:530445]]"through chatting with her, i understood that she was waiting for her friends and i was concerned that she might be hungry, and that's when i offered to buy her food," he said.
"she requested two chicken wings with chilli, and that's what i bought for her.
"station insp lim said that after handing the food which he paid for out of his own pocket to the elderly woman, he offered to accompany her home, but she refused.
through his interactions with her, he realised that she may have dementia as she did not seem to remember her name or where she lived.
a passer-by then informed the officers that the woman lived in a housing board block nearby.
two of station insp lim's colleagues then combed the block to identify the unit where she lives, while station insp lim and one colleague stayed with her.
when they found the flat, the police officers asked the woman's domestic helper to go downstairs to fetch her.
when the domestic helper arrived at the scene, station insp lim told her to remind the elderly woman to wear a mask when she is out.
"i did not raise my voice," he said, refuting allegations made by toc.
[[nid:529581]]station insp lim said he did not expect the incident to be twisted to depict him and his colleagues in a negative manner.
"i felt wronged initially.
but this whole incident shouldn't stop us from helping members of the public and in carrying out our duties," he said.
he also addressed toc's subsequent interviews with the elderly woman, who said the police officers had bullied her.
"i did not take it personally.
i understand that she has dementia and she might not remember what had happened," he said.
on tuesday, mr shanmugam defended the officers involved, noting that station insp lim is "an officer with a heart" who does volunteer work with family service centres in his spare time, and has gone overseas to help when natural disasters struck.
in 2015, station insp lim and eight other officers raised $8,000 from friends, family and colleagues to buy daily necessities and clothing for more than 120 families in kathmandu affected by the nepal earthquake.
when they returned, they decided to formalise the grouping to continue their efforts to help those in need.
today, the group counts 51 police officers as members.
they make monthly contributions to fund food and other necessities to the ang mo kio family service centre and underprivileged people overseas.
station insp lim said he hopes the public will not believe everything they see on the internet, but instead try to discern the truth for themselves.
"they (toc) can do what they want, but they should have the responsibility to post something that is factual online," he said.
on thursday, instagram user @nichology, who originally posted the video of station insp lim and the other officers and accused them of bullying the elderly woman, apologised.
"i am sorry to have jumped to conclusions and for the accusatory tone used on my instagram stories about the police officers," he wrote.
he added that he accepts responsibility for his actions and the resulting consequences.
"i understand that it was quick and unfair of me to judge so quickly and harshly.
i would definitely be more careful in future," he said, adding that he did not have any malicious intent nor did he intend to "share fake news".
"while i still believe that citizen journalism is important to provide a community viewpoint, in this case, it also showed that it may cause misjudgments and misunderstandings," he said.
[embed]https://www.
instagram.
com/p/cpyfwlfh-qm/[/embed]this article was first published in the straits times.
permission required for reproduction.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore prevailing measures to curb the spread of the covid-19 virus have been working so far, as the number of new community cases has stabilised, said finance minister lawrence wong on friday (may 28).
therefore, "we do not think there is a need for further tightening in our overall posture" for now, he said, adding that singaporeans will still need to remain vigilant and play their part by minimising their activities and movement outside of their homes.
a fuller update will be given at a press conference by the multi-ministry task force on covid-19 next monday, said mr wong.
he was speaking to the media during a virtual press conference to announce enhanced support measures for businesses suffering from the tightened measures.
costing a total of $800 million, these measures include enhanced wage subsidies under the jobs support scheme for affected sectors such as gyms, fitness studios, performing arts organisations and arts education centres.
"if there are further extensions of the restrictions beyond june 13, the ministry will also consider whether support measures can be similarly extended," said mr wong.
the minister, who is co-chair of the task force tackling covid-19, said the number of community cases has stabilised, "even declined slightly".
"that's all because of the tightening (of measures) and because everyone in singapore is cooperating and doing their part," he said.
"so we thank everyone for doing that for being vigilant, for scaling back activities, staying home wherever they can and going out only for essential activities," said mr wong.
"i think if we continue to do that.
.
.
then we have a very good chance of continuing to bring down the cases and keep the infections in check," he added.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
india on may 28 pushed for further studies into the origins of the covid-19 virus, as the world health organisation's decision-making body, the world health assembly, reviewed the findings of its special team.
the 120-page report that was submitted by the who on march 31 had listed various hypotheses as possible origins, including the "lab leak" theory that it said was "extremely unlikely", but concluded that there was need for further research.
several countries at the assembly's ongoing annual meeting from may 24-june 1 have raised the need for further studies, but it is unclear whether the body will pass any resolution on the issue.
"the who-convened global study on the origins of covid-19 is an important first step.
it stressed the need for the next phase of studies, as also for further data and studies, to reach robust conclusions," said ministry of external affairs (mea) official spokesperson arindam bagchi.
"the follow-up of the who report and further studies deserve the understanding and cooperation of all," mr.  bagchi added, in reference to who chief tedros ghebreyesus's earlier statement that accused china of limiting access to its team to conduct studies.
speaking at the release of the report, mr.  ghebreyesus had said that he expected "future collaborative studies to include more timely and comprehensive data sharing".
on april 1, the mea had also issued a lengthy statement on the report, that had listed "four pathways" or possible options that led to the pandemic: including a direct zoonotic transmission; the introduction of the virus through another intermediate host or animal; introduction through the cold chain or food chain; and a laboratory incident.
the inquiry conducted over four weeks by a joint who-china study team had concluded that the first two theories were "likely to very likely", the food chain theory was "possible", but the lab incident theory was "extremely unlikely".
in its statement, india also called for "a comprehensive and expert-led mechanism" to investigate the origin of covid-19 in cooperation with all stakeholders, and supported the possibility of an additional who mission to the chinese sites to further study the issue.
india's statement comes days after u. s.  health and human services secretary xavier becerra called on the who to conduct a second and more transparent investigation into the origins of the covid-19 at the assembly.
u. s.  president joseph biden has also tasked his national security advisor and intelligence agencies to redouble efforts to find a conclusion on the origins of the virus.
china, which has consistently denied the theory that there was a leak from a wuhan lab where research on zoonotic transmissions of coronaviruses was taking place, criticised mr.  biden's statement.
chinese mfa spokesperson zhao lijian accused the u. s.  of not caring "about facts and truth.
.
.
or serious scientific origin tracing," on thursday, indicating that china considers the "lab leak" theory report closed.
our code of editorial valuesplease enter a valid email address.
printable version | may 28, 2021 7:35:28 pm | https://www.
thehindu.
com/news/national/india-pushes-for-more-studies-on-origins-of-covid-19/article34665376.
ece

© thg publishing pvt ltd. 

the hindu's political editor nistula hebbar speaks about the recent elections held in several states in india during the covid-19 pandemic

heavy rain and a high tide lashed parts of india's eastern coast as the cyclone pushed ashore wednesday in an area where more than 1.
1 million people have evacuated amid a devastating coronavirus surge.
jakarta, indonesia — two vaccines made by china's sinopharm appear safe and effective against covid-19, according to a study published in a medical journal.
scientists had been waiting for more details about the two vaccines, even though they already are being used in many countries, and one recently won the backing of the world health organization for emergency use.
the report, published online in the journal of the american medical association, concluded the two vaccines are about 73% and 78% effective, as sinopharm has previously claimed.
researchers from sinopharm and its local partners in the middle east say the trial involved around 40,380 participants with the company's two vaccines -- one developed by the wuhan institute of biological products and the other by the beijing institute of biological products — and a placebo.
the trial was carried out in four countries — bahrain, the united arab emirates, egypt and jordan.
however, the study provided data for just bahrain and the uae.
"there's nothing very surprising.
it's consistent with what they have claimed previously, but it does not completely eliminate the doubts about sinopharm," said jin dong-yan, a medical professor at the university of hong kong who was not involved with the study.
he raised doubts about how protective the vaccine was based on a recent surge of cases in the island nation of seychelles, which had vaccinated a large majority of its population with the sinopharm vaccine.
the study, performed mostly in younger men, had little information about the vaccine's effectiveness against severe disease.
some experts also expressed concern at the shortage of female participants, with nearly 85% being male.
"it's important to make sure you have tested it in enough women to be able to start seeing any possible safety concerns," said ashley st.  john, an associate professor at duke-nus medical school in singapore.
a spokesperson for the company did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
the vaccines, both of which are made with inactivated viruses, have already been given to millions of people across the world.
the world health organization cleared the beijing institute of biological products' shot for emergency use in early may, making it the first chinese vaccine to receive the certification.
chinese foreign minister wang yi said in april that china has provided vaccines to more than 100 countries, although it has not identified them.
while china has six vaccines in use, the majority of its exports come from two companies: sinopharm and sinovac.
___wu reported from taipei, taiwan.
___the associated press health and science department receives support from the howard hughes medical institute's department of science education.
the ap is solely responsible for all content.
the most important news stories of the day, curated by post editors and delivered every morning.
by signing up you agree to our terms of use and privacy policy
singapore: a 35-year-old woman who was found dead with her five-week-old daughter at the foot of a block last year had been suffering from postpartum depression and was unable to cope with caring for her baby, a coroner's court has found.
in findings made available on friday (may 28), state coroner kamala ponnampalam ruled the woman's death a deliberate suicide and the baby's death as an unlawful killing perpetrated by her mother.
the coroner highlighted the "devastating effects of postpartum depression" and said it is important for new mothers and those around them to recognise and understand the enormity of stressors faced in such situations.
the court heard that the deceased woman was an account executive who was married with two daughters, the second of which was born on sep 20 last year.
the family lived in a flat on the 10th floor of a housing board block.
at about 5pm on oct 29 last year, a passer-by at the block heard the sound of bamboo poles breaking followed by two loud thuds.
he turned and saw the woman and the baby on the ground.
he called the police.
officers found the deceased woman lying on the ground next to the rubbish chute and the child nearby.
other items found near them include baby shorts, baby socks, a diaper and a pair of broken spectacles.
investigations found that the mother and her child had fallen from the kitchen window in their home on the 10th floor.
a stool was found at the same window, which was left wide open.
voice recording left to her husbandthere were no signs of struggle in the home and a voice recording addressed to her husband was found on the woman's phone.
in the recording, the woman said she should not have had the baby as she did not know how to take care of babies or her family.
she said she was not a good mother and wife and had let the family down.
she asked her husband to take good care of their elder daughter and expressed regret that she would not be around to watch her grow up.
she gave her husband the password to her bank account and ended by saying that she has no other way as her mind was not working.
two knives were found on top of the toilet cistern in the master bedroom bathroom, with several bloodstains on the cistern and on one of the blades.
the dna on the bloodstains matched the woman's.
both mother and baby were certified to have died from multiple injuries consistent with a fall from height.
medical reportsmedical reports indicated that the woman had gone to gleneagles hospital on sep 20, 2020, to induce labour.
she was diagnosed with maternal distress during labour and delivery and had an assisted vaginal delivery.
she was discharged well three days later with no obstetrical complication other than gestational diabetes.
there was no symptom of postnatal depression and the woman did not mention any suicidal ideation.
the woman's husband said they had their first child in 2016 and all was well then.
his wife was healthy post-delivery in 2020, he said.
what she told her husbandduring the first month after the baby was born, a confinement nanny cared for the mother and child.
about five days after the nanny left, the woman told her husband that she was stressed over having to take care of two children.
she said she had forgotten how to take care of children, and her husband reassured her, saying his mother would care for their elder daughter during the day.
he told his wife that she did not have to do anything except rest and take care of the infant.
during her pregnancy, the woman had told her husband that she wanted to quit her job as she was feeling stressed.
he told her that it was normal to feel stressed at work and that she should be thankful to have a job during the covid-19 period.
after the birth, the woman again said she wanted to quit her job, but her husband told her to rest during her maternity leave and not think about work.
she did not speak about quitting her job again and her husband thought that everything was alright, the court heard.
on oct 29, 2020, the day began as usual according to the woman's husband, and he left for work at about 7am without noticing anything unusual about his wife.
he only found out what happened when the police called him.
accounts from the woman's friendsthe deceased woman's colleague said she had not complained of any difficulties in caring for her first child.
on the day of the woman's death, the colleague sent her a text message asking if she was well.
the woman replied that she was not feeling very good and she did not know how to take care of babies anymore.
she added that she did not know what her baby wanted, or why she was crying and could not sleep.
her colleague suspected that she could be suffering from postnatal depression and advised her to get help and employ a maid.
the woman replied that she was not inclined to spend money to hire a domestic helper, and did not express any intention to end her life.
her childhood friend also testified in the coroner's inquiry, saying that she did not notice anything unusual when she visited the family at their home.
she later heard that the deceased was feeling depressed, and when she asked her friend about it, the latter said she did not know how to take care of babies anymore.
a day before the suicide, the friend visited the deceased, who told her that her baby would cry whenever her elder daughter cried.
the deceased said she did not know how to make her children stop crying, and her friend consoled her that it is normal for babies to cry and gave her some advice on how to care for infants.
she suggested that the woman employ a maid, and observed that the deceased did not seem to have much appetite and did not sleep well.
she appeared depressed and kept repeating that she was lost and did not know how to care for her baby.
police investigations found that the deceased was having difficulties in caring for the baby when she no longer had a nanny to assist her.
her friends suspected she was suffering from postnatal depression and suggested that she employ a maid, but she was concerned about the cost.
she also appeared anxious about coping with work after her maternity leave, and although her husband reassured her and made alternative care arrangements for their older child, the woman's concerns and anxiety persisted.
recognise postpartum depression: coronerthe coroner said the woman's death is "yet another stark reminder of the devastating effects of postpartum depression".
"in acute cases such as (hers), thoughts of self-harm seem almost inevitable," she said.
"the pressures from caring for a newborn can be immense.
coupled with the demands from managing the household and family while getting ready to return to work, may all seem insurmountable.
"she said it is important for new mothers as well as their spouses, family and friends to recognise and understand the enormity of the stressors.
"often, they may not resolve on their own without the appropriate help, changes or adjustments, and medical therapy if required," said the coroner.
"most of all, a good support network and genuine encouragement from family and friends is essential to help the new mum cope.
"she gave her condolences to the family of the woman and her child for their loss.
where to get help:samaritans of singapore hotline: 1800 221 4444institute of mental health's helpline: 6389 2222singapore association of mental health helpline: 1800 283 7019you can also find a list of international helplineshere.
if someone you know is at immediate risk, call 24-hour emergency medical services.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
london: scientists are revisiting a central mystery of covid-19: where, when and how did the virus that causes the disease originate?the two prevailing competing theories are that the virus jumped from animals, possibly originating with bats, to humans, or that it escaped from a virology laboratory in wuhan, china.
the following is what is known about the virus' origins.
why is the lab in wuhan a focus of interest?the wuhan institute of virology (wiv) is a high-security research facility that studies pathogens in nature with the potential to infect humans with deadly and exotic new diseases.
the lab has done extensive work on bat-borne viruses since the 2002 sars-cov-1 international outbreak, which began in china, killing 774 people worldwide.
the search for its origins led years later to discovery of sars-like viruses in a southwest china bat cave.
the institute collects genetic material from wildlife for experimentation at its wuhan lab.
researchers experiment with live viruses in animals to gauge human susceptibility.
to reduce the risk of pathogens escaping accidentally, the facility is supposed to enforce rigorous safety protocols, such as protective garb and super air filtration.
but even the strictest measures cannot eliminate such risks.
why do some scientists suspect a laboratory accident?to some scientists, the release of a dangerous pathogen via a careless lab worker is a plausible hypothesis for how the pandemic started and warrants investigation.
the wuhan lab, china's leading sars research facility, is not far from the huanan seafood market, which early in the health crisis was cited as the most likely place where animal-to-human transmission of the virus may have taken place.
the market was also the site of the first known covid-19 superspreader event.
their proximity raised immediate suspicions, fuelled by the failure so far to identify any wildlife infected with the same viral lineage and compounded by the chinese government's refusal to allow the lab-leak scenario to be fully investigated.
scientists and others have developed hypotheses based on general concerns about the risks involved in live virus lab research, clues in the virus' genome, and information from studies by institute researchers.
although the wuhan lab's scientists have said they had no trace of sars-cov-2 in their inventory at the time, 24 researchers sent a letter to the world health organization (who) urging a rigorous, independent investigation.
the who's first such mission to china this year failed to probe deeply enough, they wrote.
a us state department fact sheet, released before the who mission in the waning days of the trump administration, alleged, without proof, that several wiv researchers had fallen sick with symptoms consistent with covid-19 or common seasonal illnesses before the first publicly confirmed case in december 2019. a may 5, story by nicholas wade in the bulletin of the atomic scientists, said lab scientists experimenting on a virus sometimes insert a sequence called a "furin cleavage site" into its genome in a manner that makes the virus more infectious.
david baltimore, a nobel prize-winning virologist quoted in the article, said when he spotted the sequence in the sars-cov-2 genome, he felt he had found the smoking gun for the origin of the virus.
what are the arguments for animal-to-human transmission?many scientists believe a natural origin is more likely and have seen no scientific evidence to support the lab leak theory.
kristian g andersen, a scientist at scripps research who has done extensive work on coronaviruses, ebola and other pathogens transmissible from animals to humans, said similar genomic sequences occur naturally in coronaviruses and are unlikely to be manipulated in the way baltimore described for experimentation.
scientists who favour the natural origins hypothesis have relied largely on history.
some of the most lethal new diseases of the past century have been traced to human interactions with wildlife and domestic animals, including the first sars epidemic (bats), mers-cov (camels), ebola (bats or non-human primates) and nipah virus (bats).
while an animal source has not been identified so far, swabs of stalls in the wildlife section of the wildlife market in wuhan after the outbreak tested positive, suggesting an infected animal or human handler.
has new information emerged to lend credence to one theory over another?the scientists' mar 4 letter to the who refocused attention on the lab-leak scenario, but offered no new evidence.
nor has definitive proof of a natural origin surfaced.
us president joe biden on may 26 said his national security staffdoes not believe there is sufficient informationto assess one theory to be more likely than the other.
he instructed intelligence officials to collect and analyse information that could close in on definitive conclusion andreport back in 90 days.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
taipei (reuters) taiwan aims to give 60 per cent of its population at least one dose of coronavirus vaccine by october, the health minister said on friday (may 28), adding that the island's infection rate was not good, despite its pandemic curbs.
battling a spike in domestic cases, taiwan announced 555 new infections on friday, after months in which the virus was well under control, and has called its second-highest alert to limit gatherings and shut entertainment venues.
"if we turn on all the firepower for vaccination, the coverage for the first shot could reach 60 per cent," health minister chen shih-chung told a daily news briefing.
the authorities will use a combination of imported and home-made vaccines to reach that fraction of a population of more than 23 million by the end of october, he said, adding that even coverage of 40 per cent would be effective to curb the outbreak.
taiwan has received fewer than one million doses of nearly 30 million on order, as global supply shortages constrict vaccine deliveries.
it has also blamed china for blocking a deal for vaccines from germany's biontech.
with just about 1 per cent of its population vaccinated, taiwan is seeking urgent help from allies, such as the united states, to secure vaccines as domestic criticism mounts over the shortfall.
after pressure from some opposition politicians, dr chen said local governments and companies would be able to import vaccines directly, but have to follow strict protocols, including doing it through pharmaceutical companies.
the charity of billionaire terry gou, founder of apple inc supplier foxconn, said it was preparing to apply for permission to be able to import vaccines, but called on the government to provide clarity on the rules.
positive covid-19 cases are currently heavily concentrated in the capital, taipei, and its neighbouring city.
dr chen said current curbs, such as limits on gatherings, were effective, but the rise in new infections remained high.
"this is not a very good situation.
.
.
we are not seeing a downward trend," he said, referring to daily new infections that have hovered above 400 in the past week.
"there are hidden patients in the community," he added.
"we need to speed up rapid tests in hot spots.
"japan held out the prospect of timely help, saying it would consider sharing its vaccine doses with other countries after a ruling party panel urged that a portion of its astrazeneca stocks be provided to taiwan.
the first 150,000 doses of more than five million ordered from moderna arrived in taiwan in the late afternoon on friday.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
apple daily is hong kong's most popular tabloid and a staunch supporter of the city's pro-democracy movement (source: afp)shares in the parent company of hong kong's pro-democracy apple daily newspaper quadrupled on thursday as trading in them resumed following an eight day suspension.
dealing in next digital was halted last week after city authorities said they were freezing the assets of its jailed owner jimmy lai, using a sweeping new national security law.
but when trading resumed thursday the share price skyrocketed from its previous close of hk$0.
19 to hit hk$0.
80 before paring the gains to hk$0.
36 mid-morning.
the group saw a similar — and volatile — surge in its share price in august when police first arrested lai, as ordinary hong kongers snapped up the firm to show support for the embattled apple daily.
the 73-year-old media tycoon has long been a thorn in beijing's side for his caustic newspaper and unapologetic support for democracy.
apple daily, the city's most popular tabloid, has staunchly backed hong kong's pro-democracy cause, including the huge and often violent protests that swept the international financial hub in 2019. in a filing on wednesday announcing its plan to start trading again the following day, next digital said some hk$500 million (us$65 million) of lai's assets had been frozen, including his 71 percent stake in the company.
the freeze did not extend to next digital itself or its subsidiaries, the company said.
it was the first time hong kong authorities have used the national security law to freeze shares of a listed company's majority shareholder — a step that could cause further jitters for investor sentiment in the city.
next digital said its unaudited bank and cash balances were approximately hk$521.
4 million at the end of march.
"existing working capital of the group will remain sufficient for at least 18 months from april 1 2021 without additional funding from mr lai," the filing said.
the asset freeze comes as chinese authorities roll out a relentless and successful campaign to silence dissent in hong kong.
lai is currently serving a 14-month jail sentence for taking part in two of the 2019 protests.
he is also charged with "colluding with foreign forces" — one of the new national security crimes — for allegedly advocating for foreign sanctions.
more than 100 people — including some of the city's most prominent democracy activists — have been arrested under the law.
most of those charged are refused bail and those who are convicted face up to life in jail.
— afp © 2006 2021 the online citizen© 2006 2021 the online citizen
singapore: an online poll sexualising female muslim religious teachers is being investigated by the police as singapore leaders condemned the poll.
president halimah yacob and minister-in-charge of muslim affairs masagos zulkifli are among those who called on the authorities to investigate the poll ranking female asatizah (religious leaders).
in response to cna's queries, the singapore police force said on thursday (may 27) that they have received a report about the poll and investigations are ongoing.
in a facebook post, mdm halimah said: "is there no limit to how low some will stoop to degrade and defile women?
not only those who conducted the poll but those who participated in it also deserves our strongest condemnation.
"muis (islamic religious council of singapore) and the police should fully investigate this and punish those found guilty.
this is not just the worst kind of harassment that's against our law but amounts to an open invitation to commit sexual violence against women.
"we must not allow the anonymity of the web to embolden those who wish to abuse, denigrate and violate women.
"addressing allegations online that among those who participated in the poll were people studying to become religious teachers, mdm halimah said the community has to "seriously consider whether they are fit to preach in the community once they complete their studies".
in response to media queries, muis described the poll as "demeaning and insulting the modesty of some female religious teachers", and said that it has caused immense distress to those named.
"muis is very concerned by this.
we have reached out to speak to the victims of the post and will be providing support and counselling to help them through this traumatic time," the council said, adding that it filed a police report.
muis said it will not tolerate any form of sexual harassment, describing such behaviour as "an abomination in our religion" and "a disgrace to the muslim community".
"our faith calls for mutual respect at all times, and emphasises with utmost importance, the need to safeguard the honour and modesty of all members of society," the council added.
in a facebook post, mr masagos said he has urged the authorities to investigate the matter "expediently".
"the irresponsible people or parties behind this abhorrent poll must be held accountable with the full force of the law," he added.
he also addressed the claims that those behind the poll are islamic studies undergraduates.
​​​​​​​"if the allegations are indeed true, these perpetrators must be dealt with to the full extent of the law for demonstrating such deplorable behaviour," said mr masagos, who is also minister for social and family development.
"all of us have a part to play in calling out and purging such misogynistic attitudes from our society.
i am heartened that many have already spoken out against this appalling incident.
but we must deal with it as a civil society by the rule of law.
we must continue to be a society that honours our women, instead of denigrating them.
""must be held accountable"the issue came to light after ustaz muhammad zahid mohd zin, a popular local religious teacher, said on his instagram account on wednesday (may 26) that he was shocked when he received a "distress call" from a female religious teacher about the poll.
accompanying the post was a picture of the poll ranking at least 12 women, with their names and faces censored.
"who did this must be held accountable," ustaz zahid wrote.
one female religious teacher, ustazah fatin afika, shared on her instagram account that some of the images shared in the group were from "islamic related videos".
the incident also drew condemnation from the singapore islamic scholars and religious teachers association (pergas), which said that all "sexual harassment, abuse and objectification" was haram, or religiously forbidden.
in a video on social media, pergas acting chief executive dr mohamed qusairy thaha said it was pursuing the matter and intended to "provide as much assistance as possible" to victims.
mp zhulkarnain abdul rahim (pap-chua chu kang) wrote in a facebook post that he was "appalled, disgusted and disappointed" at the poll.
"in my years as a lawyer and volunteer with casa raudha women home, i find that beneath physical or sexual violence lies patriarchal or misogynistic mindset that needs to be eradicated," he added.
in a facebook post, the association of women for action and research (aware) said it was "troubled by the demeaning and misogynistic social media poll" about the female religious leaders.
beyond the hijab, a website focusing on the experiences of muslim women in singapore, said on its twitter account: "this shows how the issue of sexual harassment and violence in essence has never been about whether women are 'modest' enough, it is about a patriarchal culture that routinely dehumanises and reduces women with little consequence for the perpetrators.
"we are very disturbed by the fact that the group is allegedly comprised mostly of undergrads of islamic studies and therefore potential future teachers.
this is not behaviour that teachers, as people in positions of power, should have.
it would not be safe for students.
"it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
brussels (reuters) belgium's ambassador to south korea will leave his post in the coming weeks after his wife assaulted an employee in a clothing shop, in an incident widely seen on social media.
foreign affairs minister sophie wilmes has decided to end mr peter lescouhier's tenure this summer after three years, the ministry said in a statement on friday (may 28).
footage from security cameras showed his wife, ms xiang xueqiu, slap the face of a storekeeper in seoul, after he tried to stop her from approaching a colleague on april 9. the latter had suspected the wife was trying to leave the shop with an item of clothing she had not paid for.
belgium's foreign ministry said ms xiang had met the employee to apologise for her "unacceptable behaviour" and was cooperating with police, adding that her diplomatic immunity had been removed after a police request.
mr lescouhier had served his country loyally, the ministry said, overseeing a successful state visit in 2019.
"it has, however, become clear that the current situation does not allow him to continue carrying out his role in a serene manner," the ministry said.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
as of wednesday (26 may), singapore reported 23 new covid community cases and one dormitory case.
among these, 21 were linked to previous infection cases, of which 14 were placed under quarantine, seven were detected through surveillance, and three remained unlinked to previous cases.
there were also two imported cases, which were placed on stay-home notice upon arrival in singapore, according to a report in cna.
these additions have taken the tally of newly infected covid-19 cases to 26.  however, the most worrying aspect us still the increase in cases among children.
image courtesy: pixabaytwo primary school students, an ite student, and a pastor were among the seven new covid-19 community cases linked to the jem/westgate cluster.
both the kids are students of concord primary school and had last gone to school on 17 may.
while the 18-year-old student of ite college west, was last in school on 14 may.
he developed symptoms like sore throat and fever, following which he tested and found to be covid positive.
screengrab: ministry of health, singaporeamong the new case is also a 30-year-old pastor from the grace assembly church.
she was asymptomatic and was detected when she was tested on 24 may as part of moh's testing operations for those who visited the malls.
she was found positive on 25 may.
other cases linked to this cluster include:a technician, 29, who worked at the singapore refining companya 67-year-old delivery driver for dch auriga (singapore), and;female hairdresser, 29, who worked at kimage hair salon at lot 1 shoppers' mall in choa chu kang.
it has been reported that the 67-year-old delivery driver – who frequently delivered goods at jem and westgate shopping malls– has tested preliminarily positive for the b1617 variant.
incidentally, he is fully vaccinated.
as of wednesday, 60 cases in total were reported to be linked to the jem/westgate cluster.
read: new b1617 coronavirus strain: this is what is attacking children in singaporea new cluster linked to a 15-year-old westwood secondary school student was identified.
it involved the student, a 46-year-old singaporean woman, and a 74-year-old malaysian retiree.
the ministry also identified two more covid-19 clusters – one linked to the hong ye group cleaners, and another to a 34-year-old technician at singapore refining company.
the singapore cases today also include new unlinked ones that were detected through surveillance.
among them are the following:a 58-year-old singaporean woman who works at chevy's bar and bistromalaysian man, 38, who works at rong chang f&b servicesa 24-year-year-old malaysian man who works at mcdonald's at the woodgrovethe learning point cluster now has 32 linked cases.
on wednesday, a 35-year-old thai woman who works at santai cafe at united world college was linked to this cluster.
the changi prison complex cluster grew to 12 cases after another inmate tested positive for covid-19.
following a rise of cases in this cluster, all inmates' face-to-face visits were replaced by phone calls with effect from 17 may until further notice.
here's a look at some of the other cases:one new dormitory case was added to the cluster at harvest @ woodlandsthe personal chauffeur cluster has now 8 cases.
a 31-year-old hong kong citizen who works as a senior executive at endowus was added to the cluster.
mcdonald's delivery riders cluster has now 15 cases.
on wednesday, two women were added to the cluster.
marina bay sands casino has seven cases.
a 36-year-old malaysian man who works as a dealer is among the new infections.
as of wednesday, singapore reported a total of 61,916 covid-19 cases and 32 fatalities.
read: ong ye kung answered faqs on the covid-19 situation and reassured parents the good news is that the number of new cases in the community has decreased from 187 cases in the week before to 165 cases in the past week.
the number of unlinked cases in the community has also decreased from 40 cases in the week before to 30 cases in the past week.
the number of people in the icu unit has reduced to two.
screengrab courtesy: ministry of health, singaporenow with the cases showing a marginal dip, you need to be more careful.
what is most stressful for parents is that kids are susceptible to the new variant of the highly transmissible virus.
remember, it is not the time to let your guards down.
all the coronavirus guidelines should be followed strictly to help fight against the pandemic.
just as a reminder, here are some precautions that you and your entire family should follow.
image courtesy: istockwear masks: teach your kids to always wear masks whenever they step out of their home.
moh asked people to use masks with better protection.
therefore, see to it that your masks have a better filtration efficiency.
we know it may be difficult to make your kids wear masks, but you can try some reusable masks that are made of at least two layers of fabric for better protection.
wash hands: even at home, remind your kids to wash their hands frequently.
teach them to thoroughly wash their hands with soap and water.
when they are out, make them carry a sanitiser.
don't step out unless necessary: we understand that with schools on home-based learning mode, kids may be getting bored at home and want to step out.
but, you need to make them understand the importance of staying at home to curb the spread of the infection.
however, in case you need to step out with the kids, you should always avoid the crowds and maintain social distancing in public places.
stay safe and get vaccinated to help fight the infection!news source: cnanew b1617 coronavirus strain: this is what is attacking children in singaporeprimary, secondary schools, junior colleges and mis move to full home-based learningthe post covid-19: 2 primary school students among new community cases appeared first on theasianparent your guide to pregnancy, baby & raising kids.
a malaysian woman who entered singapore to carry out illegal cosmetic procedures in 2019 was on friday (28 may) jailed for 10 weeks and fined $5,500.
in a wooded corner of estonia 120 kilometres (75 miles) from the russian border, some 7,000 soldiers are taking part in a nato battleground exercise.
$6,600「」,$100「」find out who stuck with their day jobs and who didn't.
this article, 7 celebrities who married into malaysian royalty, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
the grave keeps getting deeper for tajuddin abdul rahman.
this article, after disastrous press conference, ex-prasarana chairman probed for alleged corruption, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
one of the first robo-advisors in the now crowded space, stashaway is a name well-known by many.
here's what you can expect when you invest your cash or srs funds with stashaway.
as one of the early players in the robo-advisory space in singapore, stashaway [.
.
. ]
the post stashaway review: goal-getting investments through etfs appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
《!》ut,!the ministry of health (moh) on friday (27 may) confirmed 30 new covid-19 cases in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 61,970. hdb flat rentals make up a large part of singapore's property market—according to hdb, there are about 60,000 flats currently being rented out.
we examined rental trends across different hdb estates and here's what we found.
aye mar sits with her seven children in their yangon kitchen and worries whether their meal of rice and stringy vegetables -- all she can afford in coup-stricken myanmar -- will satisfy their hunger.
「axa」:,6!two sleek new roads vanish into mountain tunnels high above a sleepy montenegrin village, the unlikely endpoint of a billion-dollar project bankrolled by china that is threatening to derail the tiny country's economy.
an international firefighting effort to put out a huge blaze on a container ship off sri lanka's coast will likely take days, the country's navy chief said thursday, amid mounting fears of a major oil leak.
many of the syrian fighters deployed, sometimes forcibly, in foreign conflict theatres such as libya and nagorno-karabakh are robbed of their wages, said a report released thursday.
,.
!the package will assist workers and companies hit by the ongoing phase 2 (heightened alert).
shares in the parent company of hong kong's pro-democracy apple daily newspaper quadrupled on thursday as trading in them resumed following an eight-day suspension.
bytedance founder zhang yiming, the brains behind tiktok, said he preferred "daydreaming" as he stepped down as head of his own firm last week.
but his departure comes as several of china's once-lauded tech entrepreneurs step aside under increasing scrutiny from a government concerned about their growing power and influence.
!marla40,.
$50,.
five million weary melbourne residents were put back under lockdown on friday, straining local resolve and testing australia's "zero-covid" strategy of smothering outbreaks however small.
roland garros has been a happy hunting ground for many of the greatest grand slam champions, but rising stars naomi osaka and daniil medvedev are hoping to avoid joining the list of tennis' big names who could never conquer the parisian clay.
investors rejected the responses of us oil giants to climate change wednesday, installing activist board members at exxonmobil and directing chevron to deepen emissions cuts.
「」$1,000!
(25) ,,,,2!hong kong's security chief has warned bankers for jailed media tycoon jimmy lai chee-ying that dealing with his frozen accounts could land them in prison for up to seven years.
when asked whether his move would undermine the reputation of the city as a global financial hub, john lee ka-chiu said on thursday he was following the national security law laid down by beijing last summer that banned acts of subversion, secession, terrorism and collusion with foreign forces.
"i am exercising the power because lai has been charged with two offences of collusion with other countries or external forces to endanger national security," he said.
"it is my duty to specify in my notice to the relevant parties what will be the consequences if they fail to comply with my direction.
"do you have questions about the biggest topics and trends from around the world?
get the answers with scmp knowledge, our new platform of curated content with explainers, faqs, analyses and infographics brought to you by our award-winning team.
the security bureau froze nearly hk$500 million (us$64 million) of lai's assets earlier this month, including his 71 per cent stake in next digital, which publishes the apple daily tabloid, as well as the local bank accounts of three other companies he owns.
the move marked the first time authorities had invoked new powers to freeze or take control of assets of a listed company that could be related to the commission of a national security crime.
but lee said the warning contained in letters sent to an unspecified number of banks after the freezing was only related to assets under suspicion and people carrying out normal business should have nothing to worry about.
lai has been accused of collusion with a foreign country and was also charged with two counts of conspiracy last month.
he is currently serving 14 months in prison for taking part in unauthorised assemblies connected to the anti-government protests of 2019.  jimmy lai asset freeze nothing to do with press freedom, says security chief a spokesman of the hong kong monetary authority, which is responsible for maintaining the city's status as a financial centre, said it would not comment on cases under investigation by police.
but he pointed to the long history that banks had in cooperating with law enforcement agencies in criminal investigations, including freezing and confiscating funds and property under relevant laws, including the national security law.
next digital resumed trading after a 10-day suspension following the freezing of lai's assets and its share price surged 330 per cent from the hk$0.
19 (us$0.
02) at opening to as high as hk$0.
80 (us$0.
10), before falling to hk$0.
28 (us$0.
04) at the close of market.
next digital's management issued a statement on wednesday saying its unaudited bank and cash balances as of march 31 stood at hk$521.
4 million (us$67 million) and its working capital would last a minimum of 18 months from april 1, even without additional funding from lai.
it also said the asset freeze had no impact on a standing shareholder's loan lai had provided to the company and its subsidiaries.
but that assessment was questioned by former city leader leung chun-ying who has been a staunch critic of apple daily but also revealed that he was a minority stakeholder in the company.
leung put the reserves closer to hk$100 million, after subtracting outstanding bank loans totalling hk$93.
6 million, and other liabilities and payables.
"will the bank call the loans?
will suppliers continue to offer credit terms?"
he said on his facebook page.
noting the statement was issued by the board, leung questioned why it had not made its own assessment during the trading suspension, rather than relying on the management's.
ex-hong kong leader has government on the defensive.
is he planning a comeback?
"who is the person in charge of the management?
this is the chief executive officer.
and who is the chief executive officer?
he is cheung kim-hung," he wrote.
the former leader – who is also a vice-chairman of china's top political advisory body – had already lashed out at cheung before next digital's announcement, revealing on wednesday that he had appointed a lawyer to file a formal complaint with law enforcement against the ceo for making "negligent, irresponsible and intentionally misleading" remarks.
leung disputed cheung's suggestion the company's operations and finances would not be affected by the freezing of lai's assets, and demanded a thorough investigation by authorities.
asked about the criticisms, cheung declined to comment.
additional reporting by jeffie lammore from south china morning post:hong kong authorities freeze nearly hk$500 million in assets belonging to media tycoon jimmy laifuture of hong kong's apple daily is on the line after founder jimmy lai's assets are frozen under national security lawthis article national security law: jimmy lai's hong kong bankers warned that handling assets could land them in jail first appeared on south china morning postfor the latest news from the south china morning post download our mobile app.
copyright 2021. the trial of an australian academic detained for more than two years in china on espionage charges began behind closed doors on thursday, with canberra voicing deep concerns over a lack of transparency after its ambassador was denied access.
australia closed its embassy in afghanistan on friday, highlighting security fears for foreign missions and their local workers as us-led troops pull out of the war-torn country.

                    friday, 28 may 2021
                
tags / keywords:
singapore
                                                                ,
                                                                                                govt
                                                                ,
                                                                                                announce
                                                                ,
                                                                                                more aid
                                                                ,
                                                                                                people
                                                                ,
                                                                                                covid-19
                                                                ,
                                                                                                measures
                                                                ,
                                                                                                rising cases



report it to us.
thank you for your report!copyright © 1995-
            

 star media group berhad (10894d)best viewed on chrome browsers.
{{item['v1 header']}}
   {{item['v1 body']}}

  {{item['v2 header']}}

we would love to keep you posted on the latest promotion.
kindly fill the form belowwe hope you enjoy this feature!
as of saturday (29 may), singaporeans and permanent residents (prs) will be required to present a negative covid-19 polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test before returning or transiting through singapore.
the ministry of health (moh) announced this tightening of border measures on wednesday (26 may) as the country ramps up measures to curb the risk of imported cases of the virus.
the new measures would require all travellers to present a negative pcr test taken within 72 hours of their departure to singapore before they are even allowed to board a flight or ferry.
upon arrival, they will have to present their results before taking another pcrt test and serving a 21-day stay-home notice (shn).
however, citizens and prs who live in countries deemed as "lower risk" for 21-days before their departure are exempted from this new measure.
those countries include australia, brunei, mainland china, hong kong, macau and new zealand.
citizens and prs travelling from these countries will have to either take an on-arrival pcr test without serving shn, or serve a seven-day shn at their residence before taking the test after the seven days.
before this, the requirement was placed on long-term pass holders and short term visitors entering singapore to present a negative pcr test pre departure to singapore.
this has been implemented since november 2020. moh had previously said that it did not extend the requirement of a pre-departure test to returning citizens and prs as it did not want to make it difficult for them to return home if they are taken caught by a quickly deteriorating condition overseas.
in its statement yesterday, moh said: "we have put in place advisories on overseas travel for some time now, and singapore citizens and prs abroad would have had more time to manage the risks of covid-19 in the countries that they are in.
"from saturday, any travellers arriving in singapore without a valid negative pcr test done pre-departure may be denied entry, said the ministry, adding that prs and long-term pass holders who fail to comply may have their permits or pass cancelled.
the public reaction to this announcement has been one of surprise, especially the revelation that citizens and prs have not been required to take a pre-departure test all this while.
many were irked at the government's slow and reactive response to the situation, calling them shortsighted and pointing out how other countries had made pre-departure testing a requirement a long time ago.
netizens chided that this should have been a requirement much earlier especially when the number of imported cases were on the rise.
one person chided the government for never being proactive in its handling of the pandemic.
others lamented that this new requirement is "too little, too late".
© 2006 2021 the online citizen© 2006 2021 the online citizen
singapore mps and islamic religious teachers, or asatizah, here have spoken out against an offensive social media poll.
the poll had asked people to rank a list of female asatizah according to their sexual attractiveness.
the poll was first highlighted by ustaz muhammad zahid mohd zin late on wednesday (may 26) in an instagram post.
the list shows at least 12 asatizah being ranked, with 1,005 participating in the poll.
"i got a distress call from an ustazah (female asatizah) and was shocked!
all listed here in an app are our local asatizah!
who did this must be held accountable!"
said ustaz zahid.
[embed]https://www.
instagram.
com/p/cpvmvecjfev/[/embed]following this, ustaz irwan hadi, the deputy director from the office of the mufti at the islamic religious council of singapore (muis), also made a similar post on wednesday, expressing his disgust at the post.
he also appealed for those involved to be dealt with the "full force of the law".
commenting on ustaz irwan's post, chua chu kang grc mp zhulkarnain abdul rahim said the people who started the poll must be held accountable.
"this is totally unacceptable against women and our asatizah.
.
.
the person and the 245 or so who polled must be held accountable," said mr zhulkarnain, referring to a screenshot showing how 245 people had voted in the poll.
in a facebook post on thursday, parliamentary secretary for health and communications and information rahayu mahzam called on the public to stand up against misconduct against women and to teach people, especially the young, why it is wrong to degrade women and men.
she added that there is a need for society here to look into the unconscious bias in people's capabilities and capacity, regardless of their circumstances.
ms rahayu, who is also an adviser to the people's action party's (pap) women's wing, said that all efforts to encourage women's development will be meaningless if society still disrespects women and still perceives women as the weaker gender or as sexual objects.
"i have faith that this is not completely the situation in singapore though.
there are some people whose conduct and comments about women are unacceptable and in bad taste.
i am happy to note that many in our community, especially men, stand up against such transgressions and condemn such actions," she said.
"i'm heartened.
but we do need to continue to educate and look at the gaps.
"[embed]https://www.
facebook.
com/rahayumahzamsg/photos/a.
1698147563741397/3024487521107388/?type=3&theater[/embed]the straits times understands that the poll was made on social media platform mewe.
similar to facebook, the app allows users to post comments, start polls, message one another and have group discussions.
st has contacted the police and muis for more information.
this article was first published in the straits times.
permission required for reproduction.
singapore the driver of a maserati that dragged a police officer for more than 100m as he fled had his appeal against his conviction and sentence dismissed by the high court on friday (may 28).
lee cheng yan was sentenced by a district court last year to four years and seven months' jail for a slew of offences, including voluntarily causing grievous hurt to a traffic police officer.
he was also given a $3,700 fine and a lifetime driving ban.
in his appeal on friday, lee, 37, who was represented by new lawyers, abandoned his previous claim that someone else was driving the car at the time.
he conceded that he was the driver but argued that he should be convicted of a less serious charge for causing hurt to the officer.
justice aedit abdullah was not persuaded that the conviction was in error or that the sentence was manifestly excessive.
the judge said lee's conduct was "heinous and dangerous" and he had to be punished severely for his offences.
[[nid:470363]]"a car is not normally a weapon, but in the context of a traffic stop, causing injury by a car or other vehicle is tantamount to the use of a weapon.
.
.
using such a vehicle to cause harm should not only attract deterrence but heavy retribution," he said.
lee was under a driving ban when he was stopped by staff sergeant khairulanwar abd kahar in bedok reservoir road on the night of nov 17, 2017, for not wearing a seat belt.
while the officer was standing next to the driver-seat door, lee suddenly reversed the car and then accelerated forward.
the officer's uniform got caught in the door and he was dragged by the moving vehicle for 124m before he fell onto the road.
lee was pursued by a motorcyclist, whose pillion rider recorded the chase.
the recording shows lee beating two red lights, overtaking other vehicles without any signal and going against the flow of traffic.
the most serious charge faced by lee was for voluntarily causing grievous hurt to a public servant, for which he was handed four years' jail.
his lawyer, mr jeremy pereira, argued that he should instead be convicted of causing grievous hurt by a rash act and be sentenced to 12 to 15 months' jail.
mr pereira argued that lee was acting rashly because as he stepped on the accelerator, he was aware of the possibility that the officer could get hurt but was "indifferent".
[[nid:463612]]"he took a chance.
he could have been lucky, he could have been unlucky.
as it turned out, he was unlucky," said the lawyer.
deputy public prosecutor timotheus koh argued that lee's sentence was appropriate, given the audacious circumstances.
he noted that lee knew the officer was being dragged and heard him shouting, but did not stop.
"his actions were fully deliberate and displayed a shocking level of callousness," said the prosecutor.
lee started serving his jail term on march 17 after he was remanded into custody.
that day, 10 more charges were brought against him for traffic offences committed this year while he was under the lifetime driving ban.
this article was first published in the straits times.
permission required for reproduction
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
beijing (bloomberg) the united states is entering a period of intense competition with china as the government running the world's second-biggest economy becomes ever more tightly controlled by chinese president xi jinping, the white house's top official for asia said.
"the period that was broadly described as engagement has come to an end," dr kurt campbell, the us coordinator for indo-pacific affairs on the national security council, said on wednesday (may 26) at an event hosted by stanford university.
us policy towards china will now operate under a "new set of strategic parameters", dr campbell said, adding that "the dominant paradigm is going to be competition".
chinese policies under mr xi are in large part responsible for the shift in us policy, dr campbell said, citing military clashes on china's border with india, an "economic campaign" against australia and the rise of "wolf warrior" diplomacy.
beijing's behaviour was emblematic of a shift towards "harsh power or hard power", which "signals that china is determined to play a more assertive role", he said.
the blunt comments were among several signs of fresh tensions between the two countries, even as us trade representative katherine tai and chinese vice-premier liu he held their first phone call.
before the talks, ms tai told reuters that the two sides faced "very large challenges" and president joe biden announced that he had ordered the us intelligence community to "redouble" its efforts to determine whether the covid-19 virus had escaped from a chinese lab.
mr biden said in a statement on wednesday that chinese officials needed to be more transparent and that beijing should join an "evidence-based international investigation and to provide access to all relevant data and evidence".
the chinese embassy in washington dismissed the inquiry as a "smear campaign and blame shifting" that would hurt efforts to prevent future health crises.
the two countries are also locked in disputes over beijing's claims over the south china sea, human rights in the xinjiang region, the future of taiwan and hong kong and economic concerns, including the deployment of 5g technology and a global shortage of semiconductors.
chinese and us officials have said they see areas of cooperation, particularly on climate change, but on many other issues the relationship is far more frosty.
"the us idea of engagement is one that has conditions and is about bringing china into its system, not only in economics but also in politics," said professor wang yiwei, director of renmin university's institute of international affairs and a former chinese diplomat.
"the us sees china overtaking its own economy, so it is looking to contain china and prevent it from moving up the value chain.
"dr campbell knows well what it is like to negotiate with angry chinese diplomats.
in march, he was among us officials who met with their chinese counterparts in alaska in talks that got off to a rocky start with bickering before reporters and cameras over human rights, trade and international alliances.
dr campbell said mr xi was at the heart of the us' new approach to china ties.
he described the chinese president was "deeply ideological, but also quite unsentimental" and "not terribly interested in economics".
since coming to power in 2012, mr xi has "almost completely disassembled nearly 40 years of mechanisms designed for collective leadership", dr campbell said, adding that top chinese diplomats such as politburo member yang jiechi and foreign minister wang yi the senior officials dispatched to the talks in alaska are "nowhere near, within a hundred miles" of the chinese leader's inner circle.
allies will be central to us efforts to push back against china in the years ahead, dr campbell said.
the us has already tried to build up the importance of its work within the so-called quad group of nations that includes india, japan and australia.
and mr biden's first meetings at the white house with foreign heads of state were with japanese prime minister yoshihide suga and south korean president moon jae-in.
"we believe that the best way to engage a more assertive china is to work with allies, partners and friends," dr campbell said, adding that "the best china policy really is a good asia policy".
still, he said the us will need to dispel fears of american decline in asia and offer a "positive economic vision" for the region.
"for the first time, really, we are now shifting our strategic focus, our economic interests, our military might more to the indo-pacific," dr campbell said.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore a fresh wave of covid-19 infections is sweeping the globe, with several countries in the region, including malaysia, indonesia and the philippines getting badly hit.
singapore has not been spared.
in the fortnight till may 26, it has seen between 19 and 38 new community cases diagnosed each day compared with the one to 16 cases a day in the previous fortnight in spite of tighter safety measures.
to some, this evokes memories of the days leading up to the circuit breaker last year, when case numbers were rising.
but there are key differences.
singapore may be battling more infectious variants of the virus this time around, but it appears to have a firmer grip on the situation.
the number of new community cases is currently lower than the roughly 40-60 in early april last year, just before the circuit breaker was implemented.
this is despite the fact that all four of the more easily transmissible variants of concern (vocs) have been found here, with several of the recent clusters caused by the spread of the b1617 variant that is ravaging india.
there are about 240 people requiring hospital care today, among whom 18 are on oxygen and two need intensive care.
but singapore has so far evaded the fate of countries that faced second waves of infection far more devastating than the first.
globally, there are more new daily cases this year than last more than half a million people are infected each day largely due to the high rate of transmission in india.
places like brazil and argentina continue to report high numbers.
professor leo yee sin, executive director of the national centre for infectious diseases, said: "the strain that is prevalent in many of the covid-19 cases (in singapore) in recent weeks is the b16172 variant.
"this has a "higher amount of virus excreted from respiratory secretion compared with the parent strain", she added, and "can amplify in all forms of transmission routes", such as surfaces, through direct contact, droplet and aerosol transmission.
yet experts the straits times spoke to were generally optimistic.
dr asok kurup, who chairs the academy of medicine's chapter of infectious disease physicians, said: "i was initially all for a circuit breaker, but it seems that the daily numbers are pretty stable and manageable.
"[[nid:530056]]professor dale fisher, a senior infectious diseases consultant at the national university hospital (nuh), said: "the curve is quite flat and, importantly, what we aren't seeing is exponential growth.
"prof fisher said singapore can also take comfort that a third of the population has had at least one dose of the vaccine.
he said singapore is "starting to reap the benefits" of lower transmissions, since people who have been vaccinated, even with just one dose, are less likely to spread the virus.
and should they get infected, the disease is less severe for them.
the hospitals have not been overwhelmed and have been able to cope.
prof fisher said that while the mrna vaccines may be less effective against the vocs, the drop in efficacy is only about 5-10 per cent which means "they are still really good".
associate professor hsu liyang of the nus saw swee hock school of public health feels singapore is in a stronger position than it was last year.
"today, we understand far more about the virus than we did before.
.
.
we know how to limit its spread and have treatment options backed by clinical trials.
we have safe and effective vaccines.
.
.
and the capacity to ramp up testing and containment facilities," he said.
his colleague at the school, associate professor alex cook, fully agreed: "we hold a strong hand.
"the safe management measures to control spread are generally very effective, adherence is good, testing capacity is high, vaccination roll-out is proceeding apace, the border has been made even more secure.
"[[nid:528648]]he said the major risk is the "seemingly more transmissible variants", which is why the safety measures "are not quite as effective as they were last year".
prof cook added that since the immunity levels among migrant workers is much higher today, "we are much less likely to see the explosive dorm outbreaks we did a year ago".
last year, covid-19 spread like wildfire among dormitory residents, shooting up very quickly to hit more than 1,000 cases a day by mid-april, putting great stress on the healthcare system.
cases in the dormitories still account for more than 90 per cent of all local cases.
singapore also has about 4,600 imported cases, bringing the total number here to close to 62,000. but there have been only a handful of cases among dormitory residents in the past fortnight.
and yet, it could be a long time before life returns to normal.
countries around the world have been hoping to acquire herd immunity through a population vaccination programme as the answer to the pandemic.
the idea is that those who are vaccinated would break the chain of transmission, hence reducing the spread of the disease.
the number touted for herd immunity has gone up from getting 50 per cent of the population vaccinated when the pandemic was declared, to 60- 80 per cent today.
herd immunity depends on a number of factors.
[[nid:527505]]the r0, or transmission rate, is of course important.
at the start of the pandemic, one person was thought to be transmitting the disease to two others so if half the population was immune, the spread would fall to one person infecting just one other.
in other words, the number of infections would remain flat.
but the vocs are said to be more easily transmitted.
this means that a larger proportion of the population needs to be immune to spreading the virus.
then, the level of protection given by the vaccine, or prior infection, also influences the transmission rate.
the lower the protection rate, the higher the percentage of population that has to be vaccinated to achieve herd immunity.
"i am not sure that herd immunity is a useful concept here," said prof fisher.
"the endpoint will be ongoing transmission where only the unvaccinated get sick. "
so 'herd immunity' will not protect people who do not have immunity either from a previous infection or through vaccination.
even with herd immunity, people will get infected, though the country will not see an explosion of cases.
professor ooi eng eong, of the duke-nus medical school's emerging infectious diseases programme, said: "i don't think we will get rid of covid-19, but the number of cases would not overwhelm our healthcare system to result in excessive number of covid-19-related deaths.
"but he is optimistic that vaccines will restore most of what life was before 2020, though he added: "we will, however, have to develop an active surveillance system for covid-19 cases even when vaccinated, to be proactive in dealing with potential vaccine-escape mutants if they do arise.
"prof fisher agreed that once people here are vaccinated, covid-19 can be treated as a mild disease.
this could even happen by the end of this year, he said.
"that's what the vaccine does reduces transmission and makes the disease mild.
we could remove quarantine as an entry requirement to singapore but it does require a very high vaccine uptake here.
"quarantine may still be required for visitors coming from places with high infection rates.
however, dr kurup said: "no i don't see this yet as we have not even climbed the peak.
"he said travel will only be possible when large numbers of people everywhere get vaccinated, and this is difficult to achieve with inequitable access.
prof cook too said that carefree travel may be some way off, given the delays in getting vaccines to low- and middle-income countries.
[[nid:528667]]"but opportunities for some forms of travel may become more possible once vaccination rates have expanded sufficiently.
"so while everyone here might chafe at the current restrictions on movement and socialising, there appears to be a light at the end of tunnel for those who are vaccinated.
unfortunately, some people, because of their age or medical conditions, cannot be vaccinated at least with the current vaccines available.
prof leo said while vaccination and contact tracing are important tools to prevent or slow down transmission, it is more important that people follow safety measures and see a doctor when sick, since the virus "is elusive in nature".
rigorous precautions by everyone may be the only way to keep it in check.
this article was first published in the straits times.
permission required for reproduction.
singapore: the haj plans for muslim pilgrims from singapore has been deferred for the second year in a row due to concerns over the ongoing covid-19 pandemic, the islamic religious council of singapore (muis) announced on thursday (may 27).
"the covid-19 pandemic situation around the world remains dynamic and of significant concern, with the spread of new variants of the virus in recent months," said muis in a news release.
"an increasing number of countries around the world are reporting new waves of infections and the coming months likely will remain challenging," it added, noting that the singapore government's advisory to defer travel except for certain essential and compassionate reasons remains in force.
in light of this, muis has decided not to send a haj delegation to the kingdom of saudi arabia this year.
the council added that this decision is supported by the fatwa committee, which is chaired by mufti dr naziruddin nasir, in consideration of the health and safety of pilgrims.
in a typical year, more than two million muslims perform the annual haj pilgrimage to mecca one of the five pillars of islam with singapore allowed 900 pilgrims each year since 2018. the haj was also deferred last year for singapore pilgrims due to the covid-19 pandemic.
muis said it will facilitate the re-allocation of haj places for the affected pilgrims to next year, though it noted their eligibility to perform the haj then will be subject to any requirements mandated by the relevant authorities in saudi arabia as well as the prevailing covid-19 situation.
last month, saudi authorities said only those immunised against the coronavirus will beallowed to perform the umrah, a pilgrimage that can be performed at any time of the year.
in its release, muis said it has "full confidence" in saudi arabia's management of the pandemic and that "appropriate measures" will be put into place should the haj be allowed to proceed this year.
"however, singapore has its own considerations to safeguard the health and well-being of singaporean pilgrims," it said.
no official decision yet on international pilgrimsmuis noted that as of tuesday, saudi arabia had not announced an official decision on this year's haj and that it is still unclear whether the annual pilgrimage will be open to international pilgrims, including those from singapore.
it noted that this is only one month before zulkaedah 17 in the islamic calendar which this year coincides with jun 28 when flights typically depart from singapore for the haj.
"haj is a complex operation and adequate planning is needed to ensure pilgrims' health and well-being, including assembling and training a medical team to provide medical support to pilgrims," muis said.
"additionally, there are many unforeseen circumstances that could happen during this unprecedented period that will compromise pilgrims' health and well-being.
"the council said indications suggest that even if the haj is open to international pilgrims, they will be subject to considerations such as age, their vaccination status, covid-19 testing as well as quarantine requirements in both saudi arabia and singapore.
"these additional restrictions will require significantly much longer travel duration, and also result in significantly higher haj package prices and affect the pilgrims' preparations for haj," it said.
"given the evolving nature of the covid-19 virus, as well as the emergence of new, more contagious variants, there is still a risk to the health and safety of the pilgrims despite the good control measures that (saudi arabia) will put in place," said muis, noting there could be factors beyond the control of saudi authorities despite their best efforts to ensure the safety of pilgrims.
the council's decision is also supported by the association of muslim travel agents (amtas) and haj travel agencies, who have agreed on the importance of protecting the community and minimising the potential spread of the virus.
amtas and the haj travel agencies have also agreed that the deposits paid by pilgrims last year which had been carried over for them to perform the pilgrimage this year should now be refunded, the release said.
muis is working with saudi authorities to facilitate the refund of deposits, and pilgrims will be contacted by their respective travel agencies within the next two weeks regarding their refunds.
muis said it hoped that this decision will help ease the anxieties of the affected pilgrims and families, and allay singapore pilgrims' concern on the uncertainty and the financial risks involved in performing the haj this year.
"this decision will also safeguard the health and well-being of our singaporean pilgrims and the community at large from the risk of covid-19 transmission," it added.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
bangkok • the thai king's sister has approved coronavirus vaccine imports by an institution she sponsors, bypassing the government as it deals with surging infections and growing public anger over a slow and chaotic roll-out.
the chulabhorn royal academy said the "alternative vaccines" would supplement the government campaign until it could meet the country's needs.
the government, which has long insisted it must handle all vaccine imports, will next month start its mass immunisation drive, which relies heavily on oxford-astrazeneca vaccines manufactured locally by a company owned by the king.
the announcement in the official royal gazette took some in the military-backed government by surprise, and comes as thailand suffers its most severe covid-19 outbreak so far and growing unease about the vaccine plan.
the decree was announced late on tuesday and expanded the chulabhorn royal academy's ability to respond to the pandemic.
it was signed by princess chulabhorn, its chairman and the youngest sibling of king maha vajiralongkorn.
"the royal academy will procure 'alternative vaccines' until vaccines that are produced in the country reach a capacity that can sufficiently protect against outbreaks," its secretary-general, professor nithi mahanonda, posted on facebook, adding that it would comply with regulations on imports and registration.
health minister anutin charnvirakul said he was unaware of the royal order before it was published.
"i just saw the announcement last night," mr anutin said when asked about it during a local television interview.
"but if it is a benefit to the country, we are ready.
"the chulabhorn royal academy, which includes a hospital and research institute, has organised a news conference for today about what it said was its import of the sinopharm vaccine.
thailand is expected to approve the chinese vaccine for emergency use this week.
it was not immediately clear how many vaccines the academy would import and when.
thailand's government is expecting to have six million astrazeneca doses and three million doses of the sinovac vaccine available next month, as it starts its main drive to inoculate 70 per cent of its more than 66 million people by the year end.
other private hospitals plan to buy 10 million doses of moderna vaccines through a state-run firm.
the authorities yesterday reported 47 new covid-19 deaths, a record for a second successive day, bringing total fatalities to 920, with 141,217 cases overall.
reutersjoin st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore a 93-year-old man beat up his roommate at a shelter home with a walking stick after the two got into a dispute over turning off the lights in their unit.
on friday (may 28), sim hwa was sentenced to six months' jail after he pleaded guilty to one charge of voluntarily causing hurt to mr oh chye thiam, 85, at the home in bukit merah.
this is the second time that sim has been convicted for assaulting a roommate following a dispute over lights.
the court heard that sim has liver cancer, but wished to be sentenced on friday instead of waiting for a medical report to be made.
deputy public prosecutor daniel ling said that the latest incident happened on oct 17 last year at 11pm, when mr oh was sleeping in the unit and sim turned on the lights.
the victim told sim that he wanted to sleep and turned the lights off but sim turned them on again.
mr oh repeated that he wished to sleep and told sim not to turn on the lights but sim got angry, picked up his walking stick and hit mr oh, who was lying in his bed, multiple times.
he tried to get up from his bed but was unable to do so and fell onto the floor, as sim continued to hit him with the walking stick.
in total, sim hit him more than 10 times with the walking stick, noted the prosecution.
mr oh called for help and a nurse separated the pair and called for an ambulance.
[[nid:524355]]the attack left him with multiple injuries, including a fracture in his left hand and swelling in his left ankle.
he had to be hospitalised for 27 days.
sim's previous conviction involved another roommate at a different home.
the court heard that in may 2017, sim was sentenced to 18 months' jail for splashing hot water on his roommate and slashing him with a knife.
dpp ling noted the similarity in the cases and urged the court for a higher sentence than before.
sim, who was unrepresented, promised not to fight with others in the future and said that he wished to return to the shelter home.
for voluntarily causing hurt, sim could have been jailed for up to three years, fined up to $5,000, or both.
this article was first published in the straits times.
permission required for reproduction.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore small and medium-sized enterprises as well as non-profit organisations who are tenants in privately owned commercial properties can expect to get cash payouts directly from the inland revenue authority of singapore (iras).
the rebates were previously given to landlords to pass down to tenants.
eligible tenants will qualify for a direct, half-month rental relief cash payout under a new rental support scheme announced by finance minister lawrence wong on friday (may 28).
speaking at a press conference, mr wong said the rental relief is to help businesses with cash flow concerns by supporting such costs.
he also urged landlords to match the half-month rental relief.
while rebates were previously given to landlords to pass down to tenants, mr wong said the government will now pass rebates directly to tenants as it has a database of tenants.
"now we have the database and the records of tenants themselves, and rather than do it through landlords and pass it down, given that we have the information, we might as well provide more directly to tenants and occupiers of these properties.
"the scheme is part of an $800 million support package that includes enhanced wage subsidies under the jobs support scheme (jss).
the fair tenancy framework industry committee welcomed the latest measures, saying they will go far in helping businesses weather this difficult period, and in sustaining jobs.
the committee comprises key business federations including the association of small medium enterprises; the restaurant association of singapore; the singapore retailers association; and singapore tenants united for fairness.
it said in a statement on friday: "the announced enhanced measures are carefully crafted, and places targeted help where help is needed.
it will aid businesses substantially in their manpower and rental costs components.
"it will also ensure that we can continue to maintain vibrant food and beverage, retail and service sectors and support those who are employed in these sectors.
"at the press conference on friday,  mr wong praised landlords which have already provided rental support to tenants.
"i'm glad that key landlords like capitaland and cdl (city developments) have already put out statements, even prior to today's announcements, to assure their tenants that they will provide additional support, and i would urge all landlords to do so," he said.
he also noted the "positive attitude and mindset" among businesses he has engaged with.
citing the singapore business federation, under which landlords and tenants have come together to develop a code of conduct for the leasing of retail premises, he said key landlord and tenant association groups have pledged to support the code.
"i think initiatives like this are a step in the right direction.
"the measures announced on friday also include one-month rental waivers to smes and npos which are tenants of government-owned commercial properties.
some support has already been given to businesses to cushion the impact of the tightened restrictions currently in place.
for instance, food and beverage businesses will get 50 per cent wage subsidies under the jss during the period for which dining in is prohibited, up from 10 per cent.
hawkers and coffee shop stallholders who are tenants of government agencies will also get a one-month rental waiver.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
grace assembly of god church is making arrangements for its two premises to be cleaned and disinfected after a pastor tested positive for covid-19 on tuesday.
a spokesman said that even though the church has not received a notification from the ministry of health (moh) to do so, it will conduct cleaning and disinfection as a precautionary measure.
the church's two premises are located in tanglin and bukit batok and all its pastors operate at both locations.
the pastor who tested positive is a singapore permanent resident.
the 30-year-old, who had not visited either of the church's premises since may 2, went to jem on may 11, and was tested for covid-19 on may 24 as part of surveillance operations for those who visited jem and westgate malls.
she is asymptomatic and her serology test result is pending.
the jem and westgate cluster has 60 infections as of wednesday night and is the second-largest active cluster here.
speaking to the new paper, the church spokesman said that its last on-site services were held on may 2.
"we suspended all on-site services and activities thereafter.
all church staff, except for essential personnel, have been instructed to work from home since then," she said.
the church is also providing emotional support for the pastor as she recovers in hospital.
grace assembly of god church was one of the first covid-19 clusters to emerge last year, with 23 confirmed cases including the church's senior pastor, the reverend wilson teo.
in february last year, moh said the primary case in the grace assembly of god cluster was a singaporean, 28, who worked at the church.
on jan 25, he attended the same chinese new year gathering as a married couple from the life church and missions.
the married couple had visited the life church and missions on jan 19, the same day that a pair of chinese nationals from wuhan, who tested positive for covid-19 , were at the church.
according to the straits times, the two grace house kindergartens at the church's premises will remain open as the pastor had no contact with the schools.
arrangements are also being made for the kindergartens they are not operated by the church to be cleaned and disinfected.
while on-site services have been put on hold, the church spokesman said the work goes on.
"as a church, we are pivoting and adapting to new ways of providing our congregants with the needed pastoral care and discipleship, especially when we can no longer meet physically the way we used to.
"similar to last year, even though our on-site church services are suspended, church life continues with our online services and resources.
"get the new paper on your phone with the free tnp app.
download from the apple app store or google play store now

singapore president halimah yacob.
file photo
  | photo credit: 
ap
 singapore president halimah yacob and minister in-charge of muslim affairs masagos zulkifli have expressed concern about an online poll sexualising female muslim religious teachers, which is being investigated by police, the local media reported on friday.
in a facebook post, the president, in a rare pubic outburst, said, "is there no limit to how low some will stoop to degrade and defile women?
not only those who conducted the (online) poll but those who participated in it also deserve our strongest condemnation.
"muis (islamic religious council of singapore) and the police should fully investigate this and punish those found guilty.
this is not just the worst kind of harassment that is against our law but amounts to an open invitation to commit sexual violence against women.
"we must not allow the anonymity of the web to embolden those who wish to abuse, denigrate and violate women," she said.
addressing allegations online that among those who participated in the poll were people studying to become religious teachers, halimah said the community has to "seriously consider whether they are fit to preach in the community once they complete their studies".
the singapore police force on thursday said it has received a report about the poll and investigations are ongoing.
in response to media queries, muis described the poll as "demeaning and insulting the modesty of some female religious teachers".
it has caused immense distress to those named, said the state-run authority on muslim affairs.
"muis is very concerned by this.
we have reached out to speak to the victims of the post and will be providing support and counselling to help them through this traumatic time," a television channel quoted the council as saying.
muis said it will not tolerate any form of sexual harassment, describing such behaviour as "an abomination in our religion" and "a disgrace to the muslim community".
"our faith calls for mutual respect at all times and emphasises with utmost importance the need to safeguard the honour and modesty of all members of the society," the council added.
in a facebook post, masagos urged the authorities to investigate the matter "expediently".
"the irresponsible people or parties behind this abhorrent poll must be held accountable with the full force of the law," the channel quoted masagos as saying.
he also addressed the claims that those behind the poll are islamic studies undergraduates.
​​​​​​​ "if the allegations are indeed true, these perpetrators must be dealt with to the full extent of the law for demonstrating such deplorable behaviour," said masagos, who is also the minister for social and family development.
"all of us have a part to play in calling out and purging such misogynistic attitudes from our society.
i am heartened that many have already spoken out against this appalling incident.
but we must deal with it as a civil society by the rule of law.
we must continue to be a society that honours our women, instead of denigrating them," he said.
the issue came to light after ustaz muhammad zahid mohd zin, a popular local religious teacher, said on his instagram account on wednesday that he was shocked when he received a "distress call" from a female religious teacher about the poll.
accompanying the post was a picture of the poll ranking at least 12 women, with their names and faces censored.
"who did this must be held accountable," ustaz zahid wrote.
one female religious teacher, ustazah fatin afika, shared on her instagram account that some of the images shared in the group were from "islamic-related videos".
the incident also drew condemnation from the singapore islamic scholars and religious teachers association (pergas), which said all "sexual harassment, abuse and objectification" was "haram" (forbidden).
in a video on social media, pergas acting chief executive mohamed qusairy thaha said it is pursuing the matter and intends to "provide as much assistance as possible" to the victims.
in a facebook post, the association of women for action and research (aware) said it was "troubled by the demeaning and misogynistic social media poll" about the female religious leaders.
beyond the hijab, a website focussing on the experiences of muslim women in singapore, wrote on its twitter handle: "this shows how the issue of sexual harassment and violence in essence has never been about whether women are 'modest' enough, it is about a patriarchal culture that routinely dehumanises and reduces women with little consequence for the perpetrators.
"we are very disturbed by the fact that the group is allegedly comprised mostly of undergrads of islamic studies and therefore, potential future teachers.
this is not the behaviour that teachers, as people in positions of power, should have.
it would not be safe for students," the channel had the site as saying.
mulims form the second largest group, led by malay origins, who account for 15 per cent of the 5.
7 million population of multi-national singapore.
the chinese account for 76 per cent, indians 7.
5 per cent and the rest are of others origins.
our code of editorial valuesplease enter a valid email address.
printable version | may 28, 2021 7:18:14 pm | https://www.
thehindu.
com/news/international/singapore-president-expresses-concern-about-online-poll-sexualising-female-muslim-teachers/article34663328.
ece

© thg publishing pvt ltd. 

diplomatic affairs editor suhasini haidar discusses what led to the country's current vaccine crisis

diplomatic affairs editor suhasini haidar takes a look at the recent developments between india and pakistan's trade freeze
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore a recalcitrant offender who was arrested after stealing valuables from a lorry defecated into a paper cup while he was in a police lock-up before throwing it at an auxiliary police officer.
sulaiman abdul majid maricar, 34, pleaded guilty on friday (may 28) to six charges for offences including using criminal force on a public servant and theft.
the court heard that sulaiman had been in and out of jail over the years for a range of offences including theft.
but he was back at it again on oct 6 last year when at about 6am, he unlawfully entered a rag-and-bone man's lorry at a sembawang crescent carpark.
deputy public prosecutor benedict teong said that sulaiman managed to enter the vehicle, as its lock was faulty.
he then stole items including three mobile phones and a power bank.
the rag-and-bone man, 44, found them missing when he returned to the vehicle later that day and alerted the police.
officers arrested sulaiman on oct 13 and he was placed in a lock-up at the woodlands police divisional headquarters.
while still in the lock-up the next day, he was given some food and a drink in a paper cup.
sulaiman defecated into the cup and later threw it at a 24-year-old auxiliary police officer who was collecting food waste from individuals in the lock-up.
the dpp said: "(the victim) sought an explanation from the accused but the accused ignored him.
(the victim) then left the scene and reported the matter to his in-charge.
he subsequently went to a toilet in the vicinity to clean himself.
"sulaiman was released on bail the next day and went on a crime spree, including stealing a motorcycle in marine crescent on oct 21. he also broke into a food centre in tai seng avenue near upper paya lebar road two days later.
sulaiman was arrested again on oct 24 and officers recovered the stolen motorcycle that same day.
on friday, district judge shaiffudin saruwan called for a report to assess sulaiman's suitability for preventive detention.
in preventive detention, a repeat offender aged over 30 receives a substantial period of imprisonment to protect the public.
it does not offer the usual one-third remission for good behaviour and the detention order can last up to 20 years.
sulaiman will be sentenced on june 18. for using criminal force on a public servant, an offender can be jailed for up to four years and fined.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
singapore two pupils from concord primary school in choa chu kang as well as a pastor from grace assembly of god church are among the 26 new covid-19 cases announced by the ministry of health (moh) on wednesday night (may 26).
the first pupil is an 11-year-old boy who developed a cough on may 22 but did not report his symptoms, while the second is a six-year-old girl who developed flu-like symptoms on may 24. both pupils were in quarantine from may 21 and had last gone to school on may 17, said moh.
the pastor is a 30-year-old singaporean permanent resident who had visited jem on may 11.  she is asymptomatic and her infection was detected when she was tested for covid-19 on may 24, as part of surveillance testing operations for those who had visited jem and westgate.
her test came back positive on may 25.
[[nid:529610]]grace assembly of god church was one of the first covid-19 clusters formed last year.
it was not clear which of the church's two branches the infected pastor is from.
the trio are part of seven new cases that were added to the jem and westgate cluster on wednesday night.
the cluster now has 60 people and is the second-largest active cluster in singapore.
a new cluster was also formed after two cases were linked to a 15-year-old singaporean who studies at westwood secondary school.
he was confirmed to be infected on may 24 and included in moh's may 25 release.
two more cases were also added to the mcdonald's delivery riders cluster.
[[nid:530003]]the first is a 41-year-old permanent resident who works as a receptionist at wanderloft hostel and also as a part-time waitress at the collins restaurant outlet at nex shopping mall.
as she was a close contact of a previous case, the woman was placed on quarantine on may 23.  she developed a fever on may 25 and was tested for covid-19 the same day.
she also developed a cough later that day.
her test result came back positive on may 25. the next is a 58-year-old singaporean who works as part of the kitchen staff and service crew at the mcdonald's outlet at pasir ris elias community club.
she was last at work on may 19.  she is asymptomatic and her employer arranged for her to be tested on may 21.  her result came back positive on may 25. there are now 15 cases linked to this cluster.
one more migrant worker from the harvest @ woodlands dormitory tested positive, expanding the cluster to five people.
other cases announced on wednesday include a 25-year-old cleaner who works at changi business park, a two-year-old girl from my first skool at 331 sembawang close, and a 20-year-old student from the national university of singapore who works part-time at poke theory in novena.
there were also two imported cases who had been placed on stay-home notice on arrival in singapore.
of these, one is a work permit holder, while the other is a short-term visit pass holder.
[[nid:529583]]the new cases take singapore's total tally to 61,916. the number of new cases in the community has decreased from 187 cases two weeks ago to 165 in the past week.
the number of unlinked cases in the community in a week has decreased from 40 cases to 30 in the past week.
with 31 patients discharged on wednesday, 61,345 patients have fully recovered from the disease.
a total of 242 patients remain in hospital, including two in critical condition in the intensive care unit, while 282 are recuperating in community facilities.
this article was first published in the straits times.
permission required for reproduction.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore an application by the online citizen asia (toc) to cancel a correction direction issued to it over a video that it posted on its online platforms has been rejected by home affairs and law minister k.  shanmugam.
the video posted on may 18 contained falsehoods alleging that police officers "had taunted and reprimanded an elderly woman for not wearing a mask", said the ministry of home affairs (mha) on friday (may 28).
the video was originally shared by instagram user @nichology.
on may 19, the police issued a clarification on the incident.
body-worn camera footage was later released to show a police officer buying the elderly woman a packet of food from a nearby stall and not taunting or reprimanding her.
on may 21, mr shanmugam instructed the protection from online falsehoods and manipulation act (pofma) office to issue a direction to toc, requiring it to post a correction notice in a new post on its facebook page.
this was also required of @nichology, who has complied with the correction order on instagram, as well as singapore uncensored, which appears to have deleted the original post but has not posted a clarification.
toc was required to state in the new post that an earlier post on its facebook page had contained a false statement of fact, together with a link to a factually article that sets out the correct facts, said mha.
"the conditions for issuing the correction direction are satisfied, and the application did not disclose any grounds to the contrary," said the ministry.
"after having carefully considered the application, the minister for home affairs has decided to reject it," mha added.
the ministry said toc has been notified of the rejection.
it urged the public to refer to the factually article for the "correct facts" about the incident at the gov.
sg website.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
bangalore (reuters) coronavirus infections in south asia surpassed 30 million on friday (may 28), according to a reuters tally of official data, led by india, which is struggling with a second wave and a vaccine shortage across the region.
india, the second most-populous country in the world, this month recorded its highest covid-19 death toll since the pandemic began last year, accounting for just over a third of the overall total.
the south asia region india, bangladesh, pakistan, bhutan, nepal, maldives and sri lanka accounts for 18 per cent of global cases and almost 10 per cent of deaths.
but there is growing suspicion that official tallies of infections and deaths are not reflecting the true extent of the problem.
this month, india opened its vaccination campaign to everyone aged 18 or older.
however, it has not been able to meet demand despite being one of the biggest vaccine producers in the world.
india has been using the astrazeneca vaccine produced locally at the serum institute of india (sii) and covaxin made by local firm bharat biotech.
it has begun rolling out russia's sputnik v. prime minister narendra modi has faced mounting criticism for the failure to secure vaccines as only about 3 per cent of india's 1.
3 billion population has been fully inoculated, the lowest rate among 10 countries with the most cases.
to meet domestic demand, india temporarily halted vaccine exports in march after donating or selling more than 66 million doses.
the suspension has left countries including bangladesh, nepal, sri lanka and many in africa scrambling for alternative supplies.
however, india is still facing a shortage, and several of its state governments, and even cities such as mumbai, have launched global tenders or sought expressions of interest from firms such as pfizer, moderna and johnson and johnson for urgent supplies.
the nation's official tally of daily infections has been falling in the past few days, offering hope that its second wave is ebbing.
but there are serious concerns that many new infections are not being reported, largely due to a dearth of testing in the countryside.
as at friday, india has reported nearly 27.
6 million cases and 318,895 deaths.
since it is unlikely to resume major exports of vaccines until october, other south asia countries such as nepal and bangladesh are making diplomatic efforts to secure supplies to prop up their faltering inoculation drives as their stocks run out.
pakistan, with purchases and donations from china and allocations from the world health organisation and gavi vaccine alliance, has now secured more than 18 million doses.
on wednesday, it opened its vaccination campaign to everyone aged 19 or older.
at least 219.
17 million doses have been administered in southern asia by friday, according to figures from our world in data.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
bangalore sri lanka is bracing itself for a major oil spill and possibly long-term pollution, despite efforts to put out a blaze that has engulfed a singapore-flagged container ship off the coast of capital city colombo.
the indian coastguard and sri lankan navy have been fire-fighting for eight days but the authorities in colombo have said the ship is expected to sink soon.
environment protection groups are now planning how to prevent an imminent oil spill that will likely affect port functioning, marine life and tourism in the island nation.
the x-press pearl was carrying 1,486 containers with 25 tonnes of nitric acid, along with other chemicals and cosmetics on board.
it had been on its way to singapore from the port of hazira in india via colombo port when a fire broke out on may 21. on may 22, there was an explosion on deck.
the indian coast guard deployed five vessels and tug boats on tuesday (may 25), after the sri lankan navy sought help to douse the inferno, the high commission of india in sri lanka said.
"all efforts are being taken to save the vessel and cargo and protect the marine environment, and it appears that the onboard fire has diminished somewhat," said a statement from x-press feeders, the singapore-based company that operates the ship.
sri lankan officials have lodged a police complaint against the captain of the ship, who was rescued along with other crew members on tuesday.
the burning ship is right in front of sri lanka's main port in colombo and is disrupting the maritime shipping lane by blocking the entrance and exit, said sri lanka ports authority chairman daya rathnayake.
the navy wants to tow the ship to deeper waters, but rough seas and monsoonal rains are hampering the operation.
meanwhile, containers with tonnes of chemicals are already tumbling into the water.
"the ship was carrying chemicals like urea fertiliser, sulphuric acid, nitric acid and ethanol liquid all very toxic.
some fallen containers have reached the coast.
residents from fishing villages who tried to take away some metal pieces have already reported skin allergies," said dr dan malika gunasekera, a maritime lawyer in sri lanka, and former executive director of ceylon shipping corporation.
the container ship on fire on may 26, 2021.  photo: epa-efe/sri lankan air force media
the government has issued warnings for people to keep away from the coast till further notice.
"apart from the toxic fumes in the air, the chemicals are also toxic to marine life.
sri lanka's entire fish production might be at stake this year," added dr gunasekera.
sri lanka is preparing for escalated damage from a tier ii oil spill, said marine environment protection authority (mepa) chairman dharshani lahandapura.
since the ship is already falling apart, he said it was too late to contain the spilt oil with booms around the vessel.
mepa estimates that if the ship sinks, at least a third of the 300 tonnes of bunker fuel oil might discharge in the sea water grease that will take months to clean.
the oil threatens to hit the nearby tourist and fishing region of negombo, 40km north of the capital.
but a greater worry is debris, especially a profusion of tiny plastic pellets called nurdles, which are used to manufacture large-scale plastic.
mr muditha katuwala, coordinator of the pearl protectors, a marine conservation volunteer organisation said these "shiny white little eggs" had now spread to other towns along sri lanka's western coastline.
"these microplastic fragments block the airways of sea creatures and fish swallow it, leading to a deterioration of marine life," said mr katuwala.
a greater worry is debris, especially a profusion of tiny plastic pellets called nurdles.
photo: afp
nurdles are challenging to clean, he added, citing the years it took to clean the hundreds of millions of plastic pellets that were dumped on the coast of hong kong's lamma island during a cyclone in 2012.
"mobilising volunteers for beach clean-ups is also impossible until the spilled chemicals are neutralised and covid-19 restrictions lifted," said mr katuwala.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
it was like a nightmare, waking up to the sight of a topless stranger in your room.
but it was all real for a braddell view resident.
caleb tay had heard a loud noise on thursday morning (may 27) while asleep and brushed it off, thinking his parents were arguing.
then, he was rudely awoken when a man threw open the door to his bedroom and walked straight to his window.
"who the eff is this dude," tay said in a facebook post uploaded after the incident.
[embed]https://www.
facebook.
com/caleb.
tay.
1/posts/10165362240130637[/embed]despite tay yelling at him, the topless stranger paid no heed and instead opened the window, huffing and puffing angrily.
he then turned around and strolled out of the apartment, tay recounted.
[[nid:516090]]tay later left his apartment to look for the intruder and met police officers at his block.
he was informed that another resident had called the police regarding a break-in in the area, and the same stranger was detained in another unit.
"we still have no clue why he was barging into people's houses or why he came into my house.
he made a mess in the kitchen, but thankfully, my parents are not hurt and so far it seems that nothing valuable was taken," he said.
in response to asiaone's queries, the police said a 32-year-old man was arrested for criminal trespass and suspected drug-related offences.
police investigations are currently underway.
rainercheung@asiaone.
com
singapore: singapore reported 21 new locally transmitted covid-19 cases as of noon on tuesday (may 25), comprising 18 in the community and three in a foreign worker dormitory.
this is the highest number of dormitory cases since oct 8 last year, when there were four cases.
fifteen of the locally transmitted infections were linked to previous cases.
eight of them had been placed on quarantine earlier and seven were detected through surveillance.
the remaining six had no links to previous cases, said the ministry of health (moh).
there were also nine imported infections, who had been placed on stay-home notice or isolated upon arrival in singapore.
three were returning singaporeans or permanent citizens.
in all, singapore reported 30 new covid-19 cases on tuesday.
sengkang general hospital worker among unlinked casesa 27-year-old malaysian man who works as a housekeeper at sengkang general hospital is among the six unlinked community cases.
there is also a 29-year-old malaysian man who works at tiger sugar bubble tea at holland piazza and a 15-year-old singaporean who is a student at westwood secondary school.
the other unlinked cases include a 27-year-old singaporean project manager at fei ying trading enterprise, a 74-year-old singaporean retiree and a 50-year-old singaporean who works as an engineer at tektronix southeast asia.
all the unlinked cases had experienced symptoms such as fever, sore throat and runny nose prior to testing positive for covid-19.
jem/westgate cluster growstwo more cases have been added to the jem/westgate cluster, bringing the total number of infections to 53. both new cases are family members of previous cases and had already been quarantined.
they are a 13-year-old singaporean student at kranji secondary school and a seven-year-old singaporean student at rulang primary school.
both boys developed a fever on may 23 and reported their symptoms while in quarantine.
a previous case was also linked to the cluster on tuesday.
case 63406, a bank officer at mizuho bank, had tested positive on may 17 while on quarantine after being identified as a close contact of a previous case.
dormitory among 3 new clustersthree new clusters have been identified.
the first is at a dormitory, harvest @ woodlands.
the first detected case there was a 46-year-old malaysian man who works as a construction worker at h&w communications.
he tested positive on may 22. the three new dormitory cases reported on tuesday are his roommates, taking the number of infections linked to the cluster to four.
the three new cases are also construction workers at h&w communications.
the second cluster is linked to a previous case, a 40-year-old singaporean who works as an employee in operations at the meatery sg.
he tested positive on may 21.  the cluster has two other cases – a 39-year-old singaporean woman who works at tomoe transtech specialty gases and the latest infection, a six-year-old student at my first skool at 211 jurong east street 21. the remaining cluster is linked to a 31-year-old singaporean who works as a property agent with era realty network.
the man tested positive for covid-19 on may 23.  there are total of five cases linked to this new cluster.
the latest cases linked to the property agent include a 60-year-old singaporean retiree, a 57-year-old singaporean who works as a retail vendor at chong pang city and a 30-year-old singaporean who is self-employed and works from home.
all three of them experienced symptoms such as cough, fever and anosmia but did not seek medical treatment.
they were quarantined several days after the onset of symptoms and were then tested for covid-19.
moh also announced the closure of the westlite woodlands dormitory cluster as there have been no more cases linked to it for the past two incubation periods.
learning point clusterone more case, a 44-year-old singaporean, has been linked to the learning point cluster.
case 63706 works at citibank but has been working from home since apr 17, said moh.
the woman is a family member and household contact of a previously confirmed case, a seven-year-old singaporean who is a student at maha bodhi school.
case 63706 was quarantined on may 17.  she was tested for covid-19 on may 17 and may 20, and her test results were negative.
she developed a sore throat on may 23 and was tested for covid-19 on may 24.  her test result came back positive for covid-19 infection on the same day.
her serology test result is negative.
mcdonald's delivery riders clusterthree more fast food restaurant employees have been linked to the mcdonald's delivery riders cluster.
one of them, a 25-year-old malaysian, had already been quarantined.
the man works as a delivery rider for domino's pizza (tanjong katong).
the other two cases are kitchen staff members: a 72-year-old singaporean from mcdonald's pasir ris elias community club outlet and a 32-year-old singaporean from mcdonald's bedok reservoir outlet.
case 63479 clustera 40-year-old myanmar national who works as a technician at greenland technology has been added to this cluster, which is linked to a previously confirmed case, a 49-year-old permanent resident who is a homemaker.
this cluster now has a total of six cases.
prestige legal llp employeea 46-year-old singaporean who works as a secretary at prestige legal llp has been linked to the 15-year-old westwood secondary school student.
the woman, known as case 63709, is a family member and household contact of the teenager.
she developed a fever, sore throat and cough on may 23 and sought medical treatment at a polyclinic on may 24, where she underwent both an antigen rapid test (art) and polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test.
moh said she was immediately isolated when her art result came back positive.
her pcr test result also came back positive for covid-19 infection on the same day while her serology test result is negative.
2 singaporeans among imported casestwo singaporeans and a permanent resident who returned from india, indonesia and myanmar are among the imported cases reported on tuesday.
one of them, a 62-year-old singaporean, had been in indonesia since jun 7, 2020.  the man, known was case 63705, returned to singapore on mar 28 and served his stay-home notice at a dedicated facility until apr 11. moh said both his on-arrival test on mar 28, as well as his swab done on apr 10 during stay-home notice, were negative for covid-19.
he is asymptomatic and was detected when he took a covid-19 pre-departure test on may 21 in preparation for a trip to indonesia.
his test result came back positive on may 22 and his ct value was very high, which is indicative of a low viral load.
his serology test result has also come back positive.
given that these indicate likely past infection, moh said it has classified the case as imported based on his travel history.
he is likely to be shedding minute fragments of the virus rna, which are no longer transmissible and infective to others, it added.
the other imported cases include a dependant's pass holder who arrived from the united states, a work pass holder who arrived from the philippines and a short-term visit pass holder who arrived from papua new guinea to visit his singaporean family member.
there were also three work permit holders who arrived from indonesia and the philippines, all of whom are foreign domestic workers.
2 patients in icumoh said the overall number of new cases in the community has increased from 163 cases in the week before to 176 cases in the past week.
the number of unlinked cases in the community has decreased from 37 cases in the week before to 30 cases in the past week.
among the 239 confirmed cases reported from may 19 to may 25, a total of 59 cases have tested positive for their serology tests while 165 have tested negative.
a further 15 serology test results are pending.
the health ministry also addedseveral new locationsto its list of places visited by covid-19 cases in the community during their infectious period.
they include woodlands regional library and causeway point.
thirteen more cases have been discharged from hospitals or community isolation facilities, bringing singapore's total recoveries to 61,329. there are 250 patients still in hospital.
most of them are stable or improving, and two are in critical condition is in the intensive care unit.
another 279 are being isolated and cared for at community facilities.
as of tuesday, singapore has reported a total of 61,890 covid-19 cases and 32 fatalities.
residents in pasir ris block test negativesingapore is in the second week of tighter community restrictions as part ofphase 2 (heightened alert), which will be in place through jun 13. moh said in response to queries from cna about the mandatory testing of residents at block 559, pasir ris street 51 that 304 residents and visitors have tested negative for covid-19 as of tuesday.
moh and the ministry of national development (mnd) said on sunday thatfour covid-19 caseswere detected in two different households living in the block.
downloadour appor subscribe to our telegram channel for the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak:https://cna.
asia/telegramit looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore a govtech employee and four cleaners are among 14 cases in the community reported by the ministry of health (moh) on thursday night (may 27).
the govtech employee is one of three unlinked cases and was last at work on may 7.  she developed a fever, runny nose and body aches on monday and sought medical treatment at a general practitioner clinic the next day.
the second unlinked case is a 67-year-old retiree who developed a cough and runny nose on tuesday.
he sought medical treatment on the same day and was immediately isolated after his antigen rapid test result on wednesday came back positive.
a migrant worker who works at harvest @ woodlands is the third unlinked case.
the 42-year-old bangladesh national is employed by teng feng engineering and works at the dormitory but is not linked to the cluster of five cases there.
he stays at woodlands lodge 2 and had reported he had not interacted with workers in the cluster.
the worker is asymptomatic and was detected when his rostered routine test came back positive for the virus on monday and he was immediately isolated.
his serology test result is negative for the n antigen, which suggests that this is an early infection.
the 42-year-old had received his first dose of the vaccine on may 14. meanwhile, one of the four cleaners reported on thursday works at henry park primary school and is linked to the pacific law corporation cluster, which now has seven cases.
the 76-year-old is a family member of three cases and was placed under quarantine on may 22. he is asymptomatic and was detected when tested for covid-19 on wednesday.
the cleaner received his first dose of the covid-19 vaccine on april 17 and his second dose on may 15. the remaining three cleaners work for hong ye group at changi business park and are linked to the hong ye group cleaners cluster, which has expanded to six cases.
two of them are workplace contacts of a 31-year-old cleaner who was confirmed to have the virus on may 19. the last hong ye group cleaner is a 56-year-old woman who was identified as a close contact of the 31-year-old.
twelve of the community cases are linked to previous patients, including a 61-year-old inmate at changi prison complex who has been linked to the cluster there.
the man had already been quarantined on may 13. he had previously tested negative for covid-19 on may 13, may 17, may 19, may 21 and sunday.
this takes the total number of patients in the cluster to 13. two new clusters with three cases each were added by moh, taking the total number of active clusters here to 35. the first is linked to a 28-year-old engineer at patec who was confirmed to have covid-19 on may 18. the second was first detected when a 50-year-old engineer at tektronix southeast asia was confirmed to have the virus on monday.
there were also nine imported cases placed on stay-home notice or isolated on arrival in singapore, said moh.
the new cases take singapore's total to 61,940. the number of new cases in the community has fallen from 190 cases two weeks ago to 152 in the past week.
the number of unlinked cases in the community in a week has decreased from 43 cases to 26 over the same period.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore the authorities have asked that a poll to rate the attractiveness of ustazah, or female islamic religious teachers, with a view to committing sexual violence against them be removed from social media platforms here.
on friday (may 28), the infocomm media development authority (imda) said the poll constitutes prohibited content under singapore's internet code of practice, and has no place here.
the poll on social media platform mewe came to light on wednesday, and is currently under police investigation.
"a poll on local female asatizah (religious teachers).
.
.
promotes sexual violence or sexual activity involving coercion or non-consent.
such content is unacceptable and has no place in singapore," said imda.
it added that it has contacted mewe to remove the offending poll if it still remains on the platform.
imda has also spoken to other social media platforms to ensure that the post does not surface on their platforms.
minister for communications and information josephine teo said in a facebook post on friday that the poll was "revolting", and that she condemned it in the "strongest terms".
"whoever is behind this isn't just trying to be funny.
they have designed a deliberate exercise to demean women, and especially women who have dedicated themselves to upholding their faith," said mrs teo, who is also chairman of the people's action party's women's wing.
the mewe poll was first highlighted by ustaz muhammad zahid mohd zin late on wednesday in an instagram post.
mewe allows users to post comments, start polls, message one another and have group discussions.
many netizens, including other asatizah, have since uploaded similar screenshots of the post to criticise it.
the list shows at least 12 asatizah being ranked, with 1,005 participating in the poll.
the straits times understands that about 20 to 30 asatizah were ranked in it.
the islamic religious council of singapore (muis) said on thursday that it was aware of the post, which had caused "immense distress" to the individuals involved, and was very concerned by it.
the council has lodged a police report to expedite investigations into the matter and "bring the perpetrators to justice".
other muslim groups have also spoken out against the poll.
the singapore muslim women's association said on thursday that it stood in solidarity with the women who are affected by the poll, which it called "deplorable and unacceptable".
the group said that it was shocked at how more than 1,000 people had voted in the poll, and it urged the authorities to investigate the matter thoroughly so that the perpetrators are held accountable and counselled.
several netizens have alleged that those who started the poll were students studying to become asatizah, and have urged muis to not accredit them.
the singaporean students welfare assembly in egypt told the straits times that it had published a letter on wednesday to show that it does not condone such acts, and that it stands with the people who have been affected.
beyond the hijab, a website focusing on the experiences of muslim women in singapore, said on its twitter account: "we are very disturbed by the fact that the group is allegedly comprised mostly of undergrads of islamic studies and therefore potential future teachers.
"this is not behaviour that teachers, as people in positions of power, should have.
it would not be safe for (their) students.
"mrs teo joins several leaders who have spoken out strongly against the poll on thursday, including president halimah yacob, minister-in-charge of muslim affairs masagos zulkifli and minister in the prime minister's office maliki osman.
she added that her ministry will continue to work on protecting women and girls from online harm.
"whether offline or online, respect and safety for women must be the norm.
there should be no question about it," she said.
parliamentary secretary for communications and information rahayu mahzam said she deeply appreciated the clear stance from imda that offensive content like the poll has no place in society here.
noting that there is much online harm faced by women and girls that often goes unaddressed, she pointed out that the ministry has been working on a singapore together alliance for action workgroup to discuss, co-create solutions and act against such harm.
"an overarching theme that surfaced during our discussions is the importance of cultivating a culture of respect for singaporean women both online and offline," said ms rahayu.
"behaviours that perpetuate sexual harassment must be condemned.
i hope singaporeans, both men and women, will work towards a safer and more responsible online culture in singapore and with mutual respect for all.
"join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
how they can help in wealth creationtomorrow is different.
let's reshape it todaylet's get smarter about money#toughertogetherhunt for the brightest engineers in indiamental health awareness initiativethe dynamic duo of a holistic self-caretrending nowpopular categorieshot on webin case you missed itet verticalsmore from our networkother useful linksserviceslog in/connect with:will be displayedwill not be displayedwill be displayed
by yimou lee and ben blanchardtaipei (reuters) -taiwan does not believe china is sincere in offering it much needed covid-19 vaccines and thinks it is working to prevent the island from getting shots for political reasons as infections surge, officials briefed on the matter told reuters.
china and taiwan have exchanged barbs as the world fights the virus, worsening ties already at a low ebb because of taiwan's refusal to accept chinese sovereignty and stepped up u. s.  support for taipei.
the two have embarked on a bitter war of words about vaccines, much needed in taiwan as the medical system comes under strain from new cases with only about 1% of the population of more than 23 million vaccinated.
taiwan says china blocked it from getting vaccines produced by germany's biontech, while china says it is happy to send a supply of that vaccine via its chinese sales agent, shanghai fosun pharmaceutical group co ltd. but taiwan will not take the vaccines from fosun, saying there is a lack of transparency and that china refuses to provide relevant information.
china's taiwan affairs office, which has repeatedly said its vaccine offer is sincere and taiwan should not put up political roadblocks, said in a statement to reuters that taiwan's allegation it was blocking a biontech deal were "nonsense".
a senior taiwan official familiar with the situation told reuters that china had not used an existing channel to discuss medical issues, which has been used to exchange information on covid cases, to address the vaccine question.
instead, he said, china was launching "political warfare" to "split and weaken" taiwan, without a real intention to offer the vaccines.
"they are shouting words like they really mean it but they won't give it to you," he said.
"there are certain procedures in taiwan to import vaccines, and if their intention is real, they know what to do.
"the government had for months chosen not to publicise what it sees as chinese intervention in the biontech case but had reached a point where it felt it had to, he added.
"vaccines are not politics.
but mainland china knows the best in the world how to politicise vaccines.
"a security official looking into chinese activity in taiwan told reuters that china was "making a lot of effort" to prevent taiwan from getting vaccines.
"it's similar to dollar diplomacy.
just that now dollars are replaced by vaccines," he added, referring to accusations the two sides exchange over buying diplomatic support with loans and other inducements.
china's taiwan affairs office repeated china's stance that taiwan had gone against commercial principles in seeking to bypass fosun.
"they clearly knew they were trying to keep going despite the task being impossible," it said.
'liar'taiwan's central epidemic command centre said in a statement to reuters that information about vaccines from fosun in a state media report where the offer was made was "unclear" and there was no way to know if the shots complied with taiwan's regulations.
fosun has not responded to requests for comment.
taiwan's government is also facing pressure at home from the main opposition kuomintang (kmt) party to accept the fosun vaccines.
at a news conference on thursday, senior kmt official cheng li-wun called president tsai ing-wen a "vaccine liar" and held up a sign saying people would die without vaccines.
cheng questioned why the government had refused to purchase vaccines from fosun, saying their shots were "100%" biontech vaccines.
"everyone has purchased goods from a distributor before," she said, adding that tsai was stuck on a "wall of ideology" and her rejection of china's offer was to save face.
adding to taiwan's anger, this week it failed again in its bid to attend the who's decision-making world health assembly as an observer, following objections from beijing and its allies.
meanwhile, china's almost daily incursions into the southwestern corner of taiwan's air defence zone have continued.
on tuesday, hu xijin, editor of china's influential global times newspaper, said that while there were humanitarianism considerations on vaccines, beijing still had a bottom line.
"military aircraft surrounding taiwan and other pressure will continue," he said.
(reporting by ben blanchard and yimou lee; additional reporting by beijing newsroom.
editing by robert birsel)in a wooded corner of estonia 120 kilometres (75 miles) from the russian border, some 7,000 soldiers are taking part in a nato battleground exercise.
a malaysian woman who entered singapore to carry out illegal cosmetic procedures in 2019 was on friday (28 may) jailed for 10 weeks and fined $5,500.
$6,600「」,$100「」the grave keeps getting deeper for tajuddin abdul rahman.
this article, after disastrous press conference, ex-prasarana chairman probed for alleged corruption, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
find out who stuck with their day jobs and who didn't.
this article, 7 celebrities who married into malaysian royalty, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
one of the first robo-advisors in the now crowded space, stashaway is a name well-known by many.
here's what you can expect when you invest your cash or srs funds with stashaway.
as one of the early players in the robo-advisory space in singapore, stashaway [.
.
. ]
the post stashaway review: goal-getting investments through etfs appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
smart,5%!$1,600,!bytedance founder zhang yiming, the brains behind tiktok, said he preferred "daydreaming" as he stepped down as head of his own firm last week.
but his departure comes as several of china's once-lauded tech entrepreneurs step aside under increasing scrutiny from a government concerned about their growing power and influence.
the ministry of health (moh) on friday (27 may) confirmed 30 new covid-19 cases in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 61,970. hdb flat rentals make up a large part of singapore's property market—according to hdb, there are about 60,000 flats currently being rented out.
we examined rental trends across different hdb estates and here's what we found.
「axa」:,6!shares in the parent company of hong kong's pro-democracy apple daily newspaper quadrupled on thursday as trading in them resumed following an eight-day suspension.
australia closed its embassy in afghanistan on friday, highlighting security fears for foreign missions and their local workers as us-led troops pull out of the war-torn country.
two sleek new roads vanish into mountain tunnels high above a sleepy montenegrin village, the unlikely endpoint of a billion-dollar project bankrolled by china that is threatening to derail the tiny country's economy.
《!》ut,!an international firefighting effort to put out a huge blaze on a container ship off sri lanka's coast will likely take days, the country's navy chief said thursday, amid mounting fears of a major oil leak.
the package will assist workers and companies hit by the ongoing phase 2 (heightened alert).
hong kong's security chief has warned bankers for jailed media tycoon jimmy lai chee-ying that dealing with his frozen accounts could land them in prison for up to seven years.
when asked whether his move would undermine the reputation of the city as a global financial hub, john lee ka-chiu said on thursday he was following the national security law laid down by beijing last summer that banned acts of subversion, secession, terrorism and collusion with foreign forces.
"i am exercising the power because lai has been charged with two offences of collusion with other countries or external forces to endanger national security," he said.
"it is my duty to specify in my notice to the relevant parties what will be the consequences if they fail to comply with my direction.
"do you have questions about the biggest topics and trends from around the world?
get the answers with scmp knowledge, our new platform of curated content with explainers, faqs, analyses and infographics brought to you by our award-winning team.
the security bureau froze nearly hk$500 million (us$64 million) of lai's assets earlier this month, including his 71 per cent stake in next digital, which publishes the apple daily tabloid, as well as the local bank accounts of three other companies he owns.
the move marked the first time authorities had invoked new powers to freeze or take control of assets of a listed company that could be related to the commission of a national security crime.
but lee said the warning contained in letters sent to an unspecified number of banks after the freezing was only related to assets under suspicion and people carrying out normal business should have nothing to worry about.
lai has been accused of collusion with a foreign country and was also charged with two counts of conspiracy last month.
he is currently serving 14 months in prison for taking part in unauthorised assemblies connected to the anti-government protests of 2019.  jimmy lai asset freeze nothing to do with press freedom, says security chief a spokesman of the hong kong monetary authority, which is responsible for maintaining the city's status as a financial centre, said it would not comment on cases under investigation by police.
but he pointed to the long history that banks had in cooperating with law enforcement agencies in criminal investigations, including freezing and confiscating funds and property under relevant laws, including the national security law.
next digital resumed trading after a 10-day suspension following the freezing of lai's assets and its share price surged 330 per cent from the hk$0.
19 (us$0.
02) at opening to as high as hk$0.
80 (us$0.
10), before falling to hk$0.
28 (us$0.
04) at the close of market.
next digital's management issued a statement on wednesday saying its unaudited bank and cash balances as of march 31 stood at hk$521.
4 million (us$67 million) and its working capital would last a minimum of 18 months from april 1, even without additional funding from lai.
it also said the asset freeze had no impact on a standing shareholder's loan lai had provided to the company and its subsidiaries.
but that assessment was questioned by former city leader leung chun-ying who has been a staunch critic of apple daily but also revealed that he was a minority stakeholder in the company.
leung put the reserves closer to hk$100 million, after subtracting outstanding bank loans totalling hk$93.
6 million, and other liabilities and payables.
"will the bank call the loans?
will suppliers continue to offer credit terms?"
he said on his facebook page.
noting the statement was issued by the board, leung questioned why it had not made its own assessment during the trading suspension, rather than relying on the management's.
ex-hong kong leader has government on the defensive.
is he planning a comeback?
"who is the person in charge of the management?
this is the chief executive officer.
and who is the chief executive officer?
he is cheung kim-hung," he wrote.
the former leader – who is also a vice-chairman of china's top political advisory body – had already lashed out at cheung before next digital's announcement, revealing on wednesday that he had appointed a lawyer to file a formal complaint with law enforcement against the ceo for making "negligent, irresponsible and intentionally misleading" remarks.
leung disputed cheung's suggestion the company's operations and finances would not be affected by the freezing of lai's assets, and demanded a thorough investigation by authorities.
asked about the criticisms, cheung declined to comment.
additional reporting by jeffie lammore from south china morning post:hong kong authorities freeze nearly hk$500 million in assets belonging to media tycoon jimmy laifuture of hong kong's apple daily is on the line after founder jimmy lai's assets are frozen under national security lawthis article national security law: jimmy lai's hong kong bankers warned that handling assets could land them in jail first appeared on south china morning postfor the latest news from the south china morning post download our mobile app.
copyright 2021.
!marla40,.
$50,.
many of the syrian fighters deployed, sometimes forcibly, in foreign conflict theatres such as libya and nagorno-karabakh are robbed of their wages, said a report released thursday.
the trial of an australian academic detained for more than two years in china on espionage charges began behind closed doors on thursday, with canberra voicing deep concerns over a lack of transparency after its ambassador was denied access.
aye mar sits with her seven children in their yangon kitchen and worries whether their meal of rice and stringy vegetables -- all she can afford in coup-stricken myanmar -- will satisfy their hunger.
51930megag,&3!
kanu,,bt21!8.
5~rafael nadal, novak djokovic and roger federer, the three most successful men in grand slam tennis history, were on thursday all drawn in the same half of the french open.
five million weary melbourne residents were put back under lockdown on friday, straining local resolve and testing australia's "zero-covid" strategy of smothering outbreaks however small.
investors rejected the responses of us oil giants to climate change wednesday, installing activist board members at exxonmobil and directing chevron to deepen emissions cuts.
everyone loves a freebie and celebrities are no exception.
on the latest episode of the mediacorp variety show liar liar pants on fire, where three celebrity guests and two hosts share a story and then guess who is lying, actress he yingying and influencer xiaxue spilled on the most cheapo thing they have done in their life.
yingying, 26, said that she once mimicked the beeping noise of the card reader when she boarded a bus with an ez-link card that had run out of value.
she explained that it happened when she was in primary school and she was taking the bus home.
alas, she also didn't have any money in her coin purse.
left with no choice, she got creative to hitch a ride.
"there were many students at the bus stop at that time so i thought i would board the bus last.
that way if i got caught, i wouldn't have to make my way through the crowd.
.
.
when it was my turn to board, i made the beeping sound.
but because i was the last to board, the bus driver caught me in the act," she admitted.
yingying sheepishly said that she immediately confessed to the driver when she was caught red-handed and pleaded with him to let her take the bus since her house was two stops away.
fortunately, the driver was kind enough.
influencer xiaxue, 37, was a little more brazen in her deeds.
she was around 16 and she working as a banquet waitress who earned somewhere between $5.
50 and $6 per hour.
"it wasn't much, but one of the perks was that i could eat good food for free.
so i would try to steal a few bites of the food every time," she said.
[[nid:530807]]xiaxue cited an example where they served a whole chicken to the guests at the table and as she was eyeing the drumstick, she intentionally served the breast meat to everyone and left the drumstick on the plate.
she was hoping that no one would take the "paiseh piece" so she could eat it after.
once, she got lucky when they were serving cod at a buffet.
she said: "i really wanted to eat that.
so, i took off a glove and wrapped the cod in it, stuffed it in my pocket, and ate the fish in the washroom.
"i was really happy at that time because it was a huge piece of cod.
it would have cost over $10 to buy a piece of that size in the market.
so it was well worth the trouble.
"also read: celebrities likened to chinese emperors in new pay scandal over meal allowancesbryanlim@asiaone.
com
singapore: the high court on friday (may 28) dismissed an appeal by a man who wasbanned from driving for life and given jailfor dragging a traffic police officer along the road in an escape bid.
lee cheng yan was sentenced in july 2020 to four years and seven months in prison, a fine of s$3,700 and a lifetime driving ban.
he had beenconvicted of 10 chargesincluding voluntarily causing grievous hurt to a public servant, failing to stop after an accident and obstructing justice.
lee's case gained attention when he advanced a case thathe was not the person behind the wheel, despite evidence to the contrary.
he claimed it was a friend he knew only as kelvin, who had a similar build and wore a similar white shirt, who was driving the maserati when the incident occurred in 2017. new lawyers advance new casehowever, lee's newly hired lawyers from withers khattarwong stated during the appeal on friday that they were not pursuing this issue.
mr jeremy pereira, who was hired by lee along with his colleague j jayaletchmi, told the court that they were "not pursuing the matter of whether or not he is the driver".
"for the purposes of this appeal, we accept the district judge's finding that he is the driver of the vehicle," he said.
instead, the lawyers argued that lee should not have been convicted of voluntarily causing grievous hurt to deter a public servant of his duty, which carried the bulk of the jail term given to lee.
the lawyers said the intention to commit this offence was not sufficiently proven at trial.
instead, he should be convicted of causing grievous hurt by a rash act, which carries a lower maximum jail term.
mr pereira said lee was unaware that the police officer's arm was caught in the car, and did not know the officer was in "any direct position of danger".
lee had defied the officer's instructions to stop and driven off with the officer hanging from the driver's door.
the officer was dragged along the road for 124m at a speed of at least 79kmh and later fell off, suffering injuries to his knee, neck and back.
he was given more than 20 days of medical leave and received a medical downgrade in his job.
he repeatedly lied under oath: prosecutordeputy public prosecutor timotheus koh called for the appeals to be dismissed, saying that lee repeatedly lied under oath.
"now he's trying to run a case that he was only acting impulsively and was in a state of panic and fear, that he was unaware of the police presence next to the car and (that he was) caught in the car," said mr koh.
"the reality is that these (assertions) were never tested in the lower court, and no evidence was led in this regard.
"justice aedit abdullah noted that the new defence lawyers had tried their best despite taking up the case only recently, but said he was not convinced that the convictions were in error.
he said lee knew the police officer was next to his vehicle and it was "strongly inferrable" that he knew the officer would be hit.
"this is beyond mere rashness," he said, adding that those who are stopped by the police should not evade them.
he upheld the original convictions and sentence.
lee faces numerous other pending charges, including for driving dangerously after he was banned from driving.
he has been remanded since march this year after being arrested for the traffic offences.
he is due back in court next month for a pre-trial conference for the pending charges.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
singapore — the government will spend some $800 million on support measures to assist workers and companies hit by the ongoing phase 2 (heightened alert), said finance minister lawrence wong on friday (28 may).
media reports also cited wong as saying that authorities are unlikely to embark on "further tightening" of prevailing measures to curb the spread of the coronavirus as current measures are working.
the multi-ministry taskforce on covid-19, which wong co-chairs, will give a fuller update on monday.
the support package will comprise, among others, enhancements to the jobs support scheme (jss) for affected sectors, rental relief for small and medium enterprises (smes) and non-profit organisations (npos) in commercial properties, and the covid-19 recovery grant (temporary) (crg-t).
wong said that the government would not need to draw on its past reserves to fund the measures.
he noted that most parts of the economy are still operating, while there are now more government support schemes like the jobs growth incentive.
"we must expect to run into situations like these from time to time, when we experience an occasional outbreak of cases in our community, and we will then need to tighten restrictions temporarily to control the spread of the virus.
"so, we will have to learn to adapt to such situations, using our own resources rather than to dip into our past reserves.
and it is on that basis that we are able to set aside some funds for this package.
"wong, who was speaking at a virtual press conference open only to singapore press holdings and mediacorp outlets, as well as the social news site mothership, added that the support package will be funded by a reallocation of spending.
the minister will table a supplementary supply bill at the next parliamentary sitting in july to effect the reallocation.
on 16 may, singapore entered a renewed period of restrictions on social gatherings and other activities, amid a spike in community cases.
the rules, such as a ban on dining-in at all food & beverage (f&b) establishments and lower crowd capacity at public places like malls, are in effect till 13 june.
affected gyms, fitness studios, performing arts organisations, and arts education centres will be given enhanced jss support to the tune of 50 per cent for the period of phase 2.  these are establishments which have been required to suspend many, if not all, of their operations.
for sectors that are not required to suspend operations but are significantly affected by the tightened measures, jss support will be enhanced to 30 per cent for the same period.
this covers businesses in the retail sector, affected personal care services, museums, art galleries, historical sites, cinemas, indoor playgrounds and other family entertainment centres.
some retailers like supermarkets, convenience stores and online retailers will not be eligible for the enhanced support.
the enhanced payout, based on wages paid from april to june, will be disbursed in september.
to support businesses with rental costs, there will be rental relief given to smes, and eligible non-profit organisations (npos) with an annual revenue not exceeding $100 million, who are tenant-occupiers of qualifying commercial properties.
qualifying tenants at government-owned commercial properties will be granted a month of rental relief.
this is aligned to the rental waiver for hawker stalls and coffee shops provided during p2(ha).
tenants will be required to pass down the rental relief received to qualifying sub-tenants, if any.
and while some landlords at privately-owned commercial properties have given rental waivers or rebates to support their tenants, the inland revenue authority of singapore (iras) will also disburse a 0.
5-month rental relief cash payout directly to qualifying tenants as part of a new rental support scheme.
the payout will be disbursed starting from mid-august 2021 and computed based on the latest contractual gross rent within the period 14-29 may.
separately, property owners who run an sme business or npo on their own property will also be eligible for the cash payout, computed based on the annual value of the property (or part of) for year 2021 as at 14 may.
to help those in sectors such as f&b, hawkers, retail, arts as well as sports and fitness, the crg-t scheme will provide one-off support for lower- to middle-income employees and self-employed persons who are financially impacted as a result of the tightened measures.
individuals who experience at least one month of involuntary no-pay leave (npl) or income loss of at least 50 per cent for at least one month during p2(ha), may apply for crg-t.  eligible individuals placed on involuntary npl may receive a one-off payout of up to $700, and those experiencing significant income loss may receive a one-off payout of up to $500.
applications will open from 3 june to 2 july, with more details to come from the ministry of social and family development.
stay in the know on-the-go: join yahoo singapore's telegram channel at http://t.
me/yahoosingaporerelated stories:of 30 new covid cases in singapore, 15 in communitywoman charged for not wearing mask at mbs, outside court and elsewherehsa approves pfizer covid vaccine storage in fridge for up to 31 dayscovid: changi airport terminals segregated in bid to curb spread of india variantin a wooded corner of estonia 120 kilometres (75 miles) from the russian border, some 7,000 soldiers are taking part in a nato battleground exercise.
a malaysian woman who entered singapore to carry out illegal cosmetic procedures in 2019 was on friday (28 may) jailed for 10 weeks and fined $5,500.
$6,600「」,$100「」the grave keeps getting deeper for tajuddin abdul rahman.
this article, after disastrous press conference, ex-prasarana chairman probed for alleged corruption, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
find out who stuck with their day jobs and who didn't.
this article, 7 celebrities who married into malaysian royalty, originally appeared on coconuts, asia's leading alternative media company.
one of the first robo-advisors in the now crowded space, stashaway is a name well-known by many.
here's what you can expect when you invest your cash or srs funds with stashaway.
as one of the early players in the robo-advisory space in singapore, stashaway [.
.
. ]
the post stashaway review: goal-getting investments through etfs appeared first on singsaver blog we compare, you save.
smart,5%!$1,600,!bytedance founder zhang yiming, the brains behind tiktok, said he preferred "daydreaming" as he stepped down as head of his own firm last week.
but his departure comes as several of china's once-lauded tech entrepreneurs step aside under increasing scrutiny from a government concerned about their growing power and influence.
the ministry of health (moh) on friday (27 may) confirmed 30 new covid-19 cases in singapore, taking the country's total case count to 61,970. hdb flat rentals make up a large part of singapore's property market—according to hdb, there are about 60,000 flats currently being rented out.
we examined rental trends across different hdb estates and here's what we found.
《!》ut,!shares in the parent company of hong kong's pro-democracy apple daily newspaper quadrupled on thursday as trading in them resumed following an eight-day suspension.
australia closed its embassy in afghanistan on friday, highlighting security fears for foreign missions and their local workers as us-led troops pull out of the war-torn country.
two sleek new roads vanish into mountain tunnels high above a sleepy montenegrin village, the unlikely endpoint of a billion-dollar project bankrolled by china that is threatening to derail the tiny country's economy.
「axa」:,6!an international firefighting effort to put out a huge blaze on a container ship off sri lanka's coast will likely take days, the country's navy chief said thursday, amid mounting fears of a major oil leak.
aye mar sits with her seven children in their yangon kitchen and worries whether their meal of rice and stringy vegetables -- all she can afford in coup-stricken myanmar -- will satisfy their hunger.
hong kong's security chief has warned bankers for jailed media tycoon jimmy lai chee-ying that dealing with his frozen accounts could land them in prison for up to seven years.
when asked whether his move would undermine the reputation of the city as a global financial hub, john lee ka-chiu said on thursday he was following the national security law laid down by beijing last summer that banned acts of subversion, secession, terrorism and collusion with foreign forces.
"i am exercising the power because lai has been charged with two offences of collusion with other countries or external forces to endanger national security," he said.
"it is my duty to specify in my notice to the relevant parties what will be the consequences if they fail to comply with my direction.
"do you have questions about the biggest topics and trends from around the world?
get the answers with scmp knowledge, our new platform of curated content with explainers, faqs, analyses and infographics brought to you by our award-winning team.
the security bureau froze nearly hk$500 million (us$64 million) of lai's assets earlier this month, including his 71 per cent stake in next digital, which publishes the apple daily tabloid, as well as the local bank accounts of three other companies he owns.
the move marked the first time authorities had invoked new powers to freeze or take control of assets of a listed company that could be related to the commission of a national security crime.
but lee said the warning contained in letters sent to an unspecified number of banks after the freezing was only related to assets under suspicion and people carrying out normal business should have nothing to worry about.
lai has been accused of collusion with a foreign country and was also charged with two counts of conspiracy last month.
he is currently serving 14 months in prison for taking part in unauthorised assemblies connected to the anti-government protests of 2019.  jimmy lai asset freeze nothing to do with press freedom, says security chief a spokesman of the hong kong monetary authority, which is responsible for maintaining the city's status as a financial centre, said it would not comment on cases under investigation by police.
but he pointed to the long history that banks had in cooperating with law enforcement agencies in criminal investigations, including freezing and confiscating funds and property under relevant laws, including the national security law.
next digital resumed trading after a 10-day suspension following the freezing of lai's assets and its share price surged 330 per cent from the hk$0.
19 (us$0.
02) at opening to as high as hk$0.
80 (us$0.
10), before falling to hk$0.
28 (us$0.
04) at the close of market.
next digital's management issued a statement on wednesday saying its unaudited bank and cash balances as of march 31 stood at hk$521.
4 million (us$67 million) and its working capital would last a minimum of 18 months from april 1, even without additional funding from lai.
it also said the asset freeze had no impact on a standing shareholder's loan lai had provided to the company and its subsidiaries.
but that assessment was questioned by former city leader leung chun-ying who has been a staunch critic of apple daily but also revealed that he was a minority stakeholder in the company.
leung put the reserves closer to hk$100 million, after subtracting outstanding bank loans totalling hk$93.
6 million, and other liabilities and payables.
"will the bank call the loans?
will suppliers continue to offer credit terms?"
he said on his facebook page.
noting the statement was issued by the board, leung questioned why it had not made its own assessment during the trading suspension, rather than relying on the management's.
ex-hong kong leader has government on the defensive.
is he planning a comeback?
"who is the person in charge of the management?
this is the chief executive officer.
and who is the chief executive officer?
he is cheung kim-hung," he wrote.
the former leader – who is also a vice-chairman of china's top political advisory body – had already lashed out at cheung before next digital's announcement, revealing on wednesday that he had appointed a lawyer to file a formal complaint with law enforcement against the ceo for making "negligent, irresponsible and intentionally misleading" remarks.
leung disputed cheung's suggestion the company's operations and finances would not be affected by the freezing of lai's assets, and demanded a thorough investigation by authorities.
asked about the criticisms, cheung declined to comment.
additional reporting by jeffie lammore from south china morning post:hong kong authorities freeze nearly hk$500 million in assets belonging to media tycoon jimmy laifuture of hong kong's apple daily is on the line after founder jimmy lai's assets are frozen under national security lawthis article national security law: jimmy lai's hong kong bankers warned that handling assets could land them in jail first appeared on south china morning postfor the latest news from the south china morning post download our mobile app.
copyright 2021.
51930megag,&3!
kanu,,bt21!8.
5~many of the syrian fighters deployed, sometimes forcibly, in foreign conflict theatres such as libya and nagorno-karabakh are robbed of their wages, said a report released thursday.
the trial of an australian academic detained for more than two years in china on espionage charges began behind closed doors on thursday, with canberra voicing deep concerns over a lack of transparency after its ambassador was denied access.
rafael nadal, novak djokovic and roger federer, the three most successful men in grand slam tennis history, were on thursday all drawn in the same half of the french open.
,,,.
five million weary melbourne residents were put back under lockdown on friday, straining local resolve and testing australia's "zero-covid" strategy of smothering outbreaks however small.
investors rejected the responses of us oil giants to climate change wednesday, installing activist board members at exxonmobil and directing chevron to deepen emissions cuts.
belarus on wednesday accused french authorities of committing an act of "air piracy" after a belarusian passenger plane flying from minsk to barcelona was denied passage through french airspace and turned back.
belarusian state carrier belavia said that flight b2869 with 56 passengers on board had been refused permission to go through french airspace and had to spend around two hours in mid-air before returning to minsk.
police leading hong kong pro-democracy media mogul jimmy lai away from his home on 10 aug 2020 after he was arrested under the new national security law in hong kong (source: afp)jailed hong kong media tycoon jimmy lai was among eight democracy activists handed new prison sentences on friday for attending protests on the 70th anniversary of the founding of communist china that were followed by a sweeping crackdown.
lai, who is already behind bars for taking part in earlier protests, must now serve a total of 20 months after pleading guilty to organising and participating in an unlawful assembly on 1 october 2019. seven other leading activists, including 25-year-old youth campaigner figo chan, as well as former lawmakers lee cheuk-yan and leung kwok-hung, were also given new jail sentences.
the new sentences are the latest in a relentless and successful campaign by china to smother dissent and dismantle hong kong's democracy movement.
hong kong was convulsed by months of huge and often violent pro-democracy protests in 2019 in the most serious challenge to beijing's rule since the city's 1997 handover.
the clashes with police on china's national day were some of the worst of that period.
it was a vivid and embarrassing illustration of how huge swathes of hong kong's population seethe under beijing's rule as the government celebrated 70 years since communist china's founding.
while clashes between hardcore protests and police raged across the city that day, the march attended by the activists who were jailed on friday remained largely peaceful.
but it did not have official police permission, a requirement in hong kong.
"it was naive to believe a rallying call for peaceful and rational behaviour would be enough to ensure no violence," district judge amanda woodcock said as she handed down jail sentences to the eight activists.
— afp © 2006 2021 the online citizen© 2006 2021 the online citizen
singapore: anonline poll sexualising female muslim religious teachershas been assessed to have breached singapore's internet regulations, said the infocomm media development authority (imda) on friday (may 28).
the poll ranking female asatizah (religious teachers), which was posted on the mewe social media platform, "promotes sexual violence or sexual activity involving coercion or non-consent", said imda in a statement.
"such content is unacceptable and has no place in singapore.
imda has assessed it constitutes prohibited content under singapore's internet code of practice," added the authority.
imda said it has contacted mewe to request that it removes the "offending poll if it still remains on the platform".
it has also contacted other social media platforms to ensure the post does not surface there.
minister for communication and information josephine teo said imda has reached out to facebook, google and twitter.
in a facebook post on friday, mrs teo called the poll "revolting", saying that "whoever is behind this isn't just trying to be funny".
"they have designed a deliberate exercise to demean women, and especially women who have dedicated themselves to upholding their faith.
i'm appalled by it and join in the many calls to condemn this poll in the strongest terms," said mrs teo.
she said her ministry will continue its work of protecting women and girls from "online harms".
"whether offline or online, respect and safety for women must be the norm.
there should be no question about it," said mrs teo.
president halimah yacob and minister-in-charge of muslim affairs masagos zulkifli are among leaders who called on the authorities to investigate the poll.
in response to cna's queries, the singapore police force said on thursday that they have received a report about the poll and investigations are ongoing.
on its website, mewe says its platform is for "law-abiding" people.
"we have a strict and clear terms of service protecting our members: haters, bullies, porn, spammers, bots, lawbreakers, violence inciters, etc are prohibited.
"it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
read 3 articles daily and stand to win st rewards, including the st news tablet worth $398.
spin the wheel for st read and win now.
singapore there were 30 new coronavirus cases confirmed at noon on friday (may 28), taking singapore's total to 61,970. fifteen of them are community cases.
there are no new cases in migrant workers' dormitories.
eleven of the locally transmitted cases have been linked to previous cases, with four unlinked.
eight linked cases had already been quarantined.
there were also 15 imported cases who have already been placed on stay-home notice or isolated upon arrival in singapore.
of these, eight are returning singaporeans or permanent residents.
more details will be announced on friday night, said the ministry of health.
join st's telegram channel here and get the latest breaking news delivered to you.
sph digital news / copyright © 2021 singapore press holdings ltd.  co.  regn.
no.
198402868e.
all rights reservedwe have been experiencing some problems with subscriber log-ins and apologise for the inconvenience caused.
until we resolve the issues, subscribers need not log in to access st digital articles.
but a log-in is still required for our pdfs.
colombo: an international firefighting effort to put out a huge blaze on a container ship off sri lanka's coast will likely take days, the country's navy chief said on thursday (may 27), amid mounting fears of a major oil leak.
nine sri lankan ships and three indian vessels have been working with international salvage experts to douse the eight-day old inferno on the singapore-registered x-press pearl.
the vessel was carrying nearly 1,500 containers, including 25 tonnes of nitric acid, when a fire broke out as it waited to enter colombo port.
it is believed that the fire was sparked by a leak of nitric acid on the 186m long ship.
monsoon winds fanned the flames.
but easing winds in the indian ocean will make firefighting efforts easier, sri lanka navy chief vice admiral nishantha ulugetenne said, describing the sea and wind conditions as "favourable".
"i hope in another few days we can extinguish this fire completely," he told afp.
sri lanka's marine environment protection authority (mepa) has said it fears the vessel could break up and leak oil onto coastal beaches.
"the hull may not be stable for us to tow the ship away from our waters," mepa chairman dharshani lahandapura told afp.
the vessel, now anchored, is carrying 278 tonnes of bunker oil and 50 tonnes of marine gasoil, she said.
avoidable disasterlahandapura said the crew knew about a nitric acid leak on may 11 before entering sri lankan waters and that the fire could have been avoided if they acted promptly.
the ship's operator, x-press feeders of singapore, confirmed they knew about the acid leak, but said attempts to leave the leaking container in india and qatar had failed.
it said port authorities in the two countries had rejected requests because they did not have specialist facilities.
sri lankan authorities have lodged a formal complaint with police ahead of initiating legal action against the ship's captain.
lahandapura said a large quantity of oil threatens to leak and pollute the tourist and fishing region of negombo, 40km north of the capital.
"our best option is to clean the beach and we suspect any clearing operation will take a few weeks, if not months," she said.
sri lankan soldiers were deployed on thursday to clean negombo beach as debris from eight containers that fell into the sea after the explosion washed ashore.
police also arrested eight people who had been scavenging for plastic raw materials and cosmetics that washed up for violating coronavirus lockdown regulations.
in september last year, an oil tanker caught fire off sri lanka's east coast after an engine room explosion that killed one crew member.
the fire on the new diamond tanker took more than a week to put out and left a 40km long oil spill.
sri lanka has demanded the owners pay a us$17 million clean-up bill.
the 25 crew on the x-press pearl were evacuated on tuesday following the explosion.
two suffered minor injuries, the owners said, and one, an indian national, has tested positive for covid-19.
the ship was on its way to colombo from india's gujarat state.
the vessel is anchored 14km offshore and can be seen from negombo.
it looks like the email address you entered is not valid.
