Major Philippines broadcaster denied license as watchdogs warn over press freedom.
lawmakers in the philippines have voted against granting a new license to one of the country's largest and most influential broadcasting networks, a move that critics say will undermine press freedom.
a legislative committee voted overwhelmingly on friday to not renew the franchise of media company abs-cbn, which known for its unflinching coverage of president rodrigo duterte.
the vote comes after lawmakers allowed the media conglomerate's previous license to expire in may, forcing it off the air.
abs-cbn has 24 hours to appeal the decision -- but allies of duterte control both houses of the legislature.
founded in 1953, abs-cbn is one of the most-watched television stations in the philippines, providing both news and entertainment programs.
it operates dozens of television and radio stations and employs about 11,000 people.
media watchdogs and human rights groups condemned the decision, describing it as an assault on press freedom and comparing it to a campaign against the media by former philippine dictator ferdinand marcos in the 1970s.
"this is a black day for media freedom in a country previously regarded as a bastion of press freedom and democracy in the region," phil robertson, deputy asia director at human rights watch, said in a statement.
the foreign correspondents association of the philippines (focap) said the decision "deprives the filipino people of an independent source of information when millions are grappling with the coronavirus pandemic. "
"focap was founded during the dark days of martial law in 1974 to safeguard press freedom.
the threats have never ceased and we will never flinch and never cower," the group added.
senator risa hontiveros, an opposition lawmaker, said in a statement that the decision sets a "dangerous precedent" and is essentially the "death knell on press freedom in the country. "
since becoming president in june 2016, duterte has repeatedly threatened and disparaged the country's media, accusing outlets of creating "fake news" and referring to journalists as "spies" and "sons of bitches. "
abs-cbn has come under particular attack, owing to its critical coverage of duterte's brutal "war on drugs," which has resulted in the death of more than 6,600 people since it began in june 2016, according to police records.
duterte has frequently threatened to take abs-cbn off the air, including during a swearing-in ceremony in november 2019 when he said they would be "out" in 2020, according to cnn philippines.
"if you are expecting [a renewal], i'm sorry.
you're out.
i will see to it that you're out," duterte said at the time.
in an interview earlier this year with the philippines tv network abs news channel (anc), presidential spokesperson harry roque downplayed the role of the president's office in the media company's problems.
"he really is neutral and [wants] to let all his allies know that he will not hold it against them.
it will not endear him either way.
they can vote as they wish," he said.
abs-cbn president and ceo carlo katigbak said friday that he was "deeply hurt" by the decision made by lawmakers.
"we remain committed to public service, and we hope to find other ways to achieve our mission," he said in a statement reported by the company's news division.
abs-cbn is not the first news organization to experience trouble under the duterte administration.
maria ressa, the ceo of upstart media company rappler, was found guilty of "cyber libel" last month, in a case she and press freedom groups have described as a politically motivated prosecution by the duterte government.
rappler's extensive reporting on the philippines under duterte has made the site — and its journalists — targets of his supporters.
"if you're a reporter in the philippines, this is part of daily life.
it's like pollution in the air," ressa said in a recent interview with cnn.
— charles riley contributed reporting from london.
by jun ramirezimmigration officers at the ninoy aquino international airport (naia) have arrested a malaysian impostor who attempted to enter the country by passing as a taiwanese.
bureau of immigration (bi) port operations chief grifton medina reported that the alien was intercepted on jan.  14 at the arrival area of the naia terminal 2 alighting a philippine airlines flight from ho chi minh city, vietnam.
the malaysian was identified as yap kean hwa, 30, who assumed the name tsou chang chen in his counterfeit taiwanese passport.
medina said they received information that yap is a suspected fugitive wanted in malaysia, explaining his attempt to use a different name and passport.
the taipei economic and cultural office (teco) in manila later confirmed that the taiwanese passport used was reported stolen in 2017 and was issued to a different person.
bi commissioner jaime morente commended the officers involved in the arrest.
yap is currently detained in the bureau's warden facility in bicutan, taguig, pending his prosecution for violating immigration laws.
a united states marine convicted of killing a transgender woman in the philippines in 2014 has been granted an "absolute pardon" by president rodrigo duterte in a case that sparked outrage over alleged preferential treatment given to american military personnel on assignment in the country.
lance cpl.
joseph scott pemberton has served about six years of the 10-year sentence he was given in 2015 for killing jennifer laude, a 26-year-old transgender woman, in a motel room in 2014.  duterte's action was announced by philippine foreign affairs secretary teddy locsin jr.  on monday and confirmed by presidential spokesperson harry roque in a report by the state-run philippine news agency (pna).
it came after a court last week said pemberton should be given credit for good conduct during his time served in the camp aguinaldo military prison in quezon city, rather than new bilibid prison, the country's main penitentiary, according to a cnn philippines report.
that credit amounted to more than four years, the court said, and with time served after his arrest but before trial, pemberton had served the 10 years required.
critics said it was easy for pemberton to be on good behavior because he was able to serve his sentence alone rather than with the general prison population.
"cutting matters short over what constitutes time served, and since where he was detained was not in the prisoner's control -- and to do justice -- the president has granted an absolute pardon to pemberton," locsin said in a twitter post.
pemberton's lawyer, rowena flores, said duterte's decision was not something her client sought and that she first learned of it from the media.
"i thank our president for his pardon.
i think with this development, justice is served and that the laws were followed," she told cnn philippines.
duterte, speaking in his weekly address on monday, said no records were kept on pemberton's behavior in the military prison so he should be assumed to have acted properly.
"you have not treated pemberton fairly, " duterte said, according to pna.
"we should allow him the good character presumption. "
pemberton was 19 at the time of his conviction.
he was convicted of the lesser charge of homicide, rather than murder, after the court determined that pemberton had not acted with "treachery. "
the naked body of laude was found with her head in a toilet in an olongapo hotel room shortly after midnight on october 12, 2014, police said after his arrest.
witnesses told police that pemberton was with laude at a local disco before the two checked into a hotel on the night of october 11, according to documents seen by cnn.
pemberton told police that he'd choked laude, but then tried to revive her.
he said he had become angry with laude upon discovering she had male genitalia, according to police.
pemberton, from massachusetts, was an anti-tank missileman assigned to 2nd battalion, 9th marines, out of camp lejeune, north carolina.
he was in the philippines for military exercises being conducted under the visiting forces agreement (vfa).
signed in 1988, it gives us military aircraft and vessels free entry into the philippines and relaxes visa restrictions for us military personnel.
but it gives the philippines primary jurisdiction over us military personnel accused of crimes in the country, unless those crimes involve other us troops.
the philippines was once home to two of america's largest military bases outside of the us: clark air base and subic bay naval station.
although those ceased to be us bases in the early 1990s, us forces still had access to them under the vfa.
the hotel where laude was killed was outside subic bay.
pemberton was on leave after participating in the military exercises.
sen.  imee marcos said the pardon served justice under philippine law while helping relations between manila and washington.
"justice has been served with the philippine judicial system functioning in accordance with its constitutional duties," she said, according to cnn philippines, while preserving "very deep and very cordial" relations with the us.
cnn has reached out to the us embassy in manila for comment.
relations had been strained in february when duterte gave the us 180 days' notice to end the vfa, suggesting that manila needed to rely on its own resources for its defense.
he reversed that decision in june "in light of the political and other developments in the region," locsin said in a social media post at the time.
the reversal came as china was stepping up its military presence on islands in the south china sea that are claimed by the philippines.
on july 12, the philippines for the first time formally recognized a 2016 ruling by the united nations permanent court of arbitration siding with manila and against beijing over china's claims on contested islands in the south china sea.
two days later, washington announced a formal rejection of "most" of china's maritime claims in the south china sea.
critics of pemberton's pardon on monday blamed the philippine government for putting military relations above the rights of philippine citizens.
edre olalia, president of the national union of peoples' lawyers, called the pardon "unbelievable. "
"what makes it even more atrocious is that his entitlements and liberty were apparently politically bartered through an onerous and servile military agreement.
what cheap price sovereignty and national dignity," he said in a statement, according to cnn philippines.
pemberton's lawyer said he would still need to comply with certain legal requirements before he could leave the country, but she was hopeful that would happen before the end of the week, cnn philippines reported.
