Trump administration appeals court order blocking TikTok restrictions.
jack ma's tech empire may still be facing tough new regulations in china, but alibaba seems to have won at least a little bit of favor this week from president xi jinping.
alibaba was one of hundreds of companies that xi commended on thursday during a ceremony intended to bolster his years-long campaign to wipe out extreme poverty in the country.
alibaba is a "model" of "national poverty alleviation," according to the certificate it received from the government.
the company posted the certification on its weibo account.
the company also received kudos for its efforts from chinese state media, which this week called attention to alibaba's efforts to help farmers sell some $155 billion worth of agricultural products through its e-commerce websites in support of xi's campaign.
state-run china youth daily published a report on wednesday praising the company for its innovations, such as using ai algorithms to help farmers raise chicken, helping people sell agricultural products through live-streaming, providing education and training to poor women in the countryside, and extending loans to rural regions through its online banking services.
the government-backed praise is welcome news for alibaba and ma, which for months have been caught up in an intensifying crackdown by beijing on the country's tech sector, including an anti-trust investigation.
the e-commerce giant's financial tech affiliate, ant group, is also expected to undergo major restructuring to satisfy regulators who are concerned about its vast reach in digital payments and finance.
ant's highly anticipated ipo was called off late last year after ma criticized chinese regulators.
the criticism of ma in particular — who had not been seen in public for months before he briefly reemerged in january — even appeared to make its way into state media.
last month, he was left off a list of major chinese business leaders compiled by the shanghai securities journal.
and late last year, the people's daily — the mouthpiece of the chinese communist party — published an opinion piece urging tech firms to take more responsibility and focus less on short-term results.
"internet giants with massive amounts of data and advanced algorithms should have more responsibility, more aspirations, and more accomplishments in technological innovation," the piece read.
alibaba "is privileged to have participated in [the anti-poverty campaign]," alibaba wrote in a weibo post thursday.
toeing the party line has a lot of benefits for alibaba.
xi made clear last september that he expected private companies to support the work of the communist party.
tech firms contributing to xi's anti-poverty campaign are fulfilling their obligation of "serving the state," according to alex capri, a research fellow at hinrich foundation and a visiting senior fellow at national university of singapore.
"this reflects well upon the party and wins support," he added.
"as long as big tech is seen to be in proper alignment with the [party's] nationalist message, they will be spared further public chastisement. "
even so, capri cautioned that the praise for alibaba this week "is not a contradiction of the chinese communist party's hard line against big tech. "
he still expects that the government will continue its crackdown, which is fueled by concerns that tech firms have too much influence over china's financial system.
several media outlets have reported that ant, for example, has agreed with authorities to become a financial holding company — a move that could force it to scale down its aspirations to be a dominant force in the tech world.
— jill disis contributed to this report.
the trump administration isn't giving up on its campaign against tiktok just yet.
the us government on monday appealed a decision handed down by a federal judge earlier this month that prevented authorities from fully implementing its restrictions against the popular short-form video app.
the appeal challenges a dec.  7 preliminary injunction from us district court judge carl nichols, which prevented the us department of commerce from enforcing rules that would have made it illegal for infrastructure companies to carry tiktok's network traffic.
that ruling followed an earlier injunction that prevented the commerce department from banning downloads of tiktok from us app stores.
tiktok did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
the company has been in the trump administration's cross hairs for months.
us president donald trump has accused tiktok of posing a national security risk because its chinese owner, bytedance, could be forced to hand over tiktok's user data to the chinese government.
tiktok has denied the claim and said tiktok stores us user data in virginia and singapore — out of the reach of chinese law.
tiktok has been hammering out a deal with the us government meant to satisfy its concerns that would bring in us investors, such as oracle and walmart.
but that deal has not been finalized.
earlier this month, the us government declined to extend a deadline it had set for bytedance to sell off the app.
but it also decided not to enforce an executive order requiring the sale.
that allowed negotiations between tiktok and us officials to continue.
but it's not clear whether concerns about the app will be resolved before president-elect joe biden takes office next month.
on sunday, andrew adonis, a member of britain's house of lords and onetime cabinet minister, took aim at the idea that the coronavirus pandemic was causing a crisis of capitalism.
"lots of instant commentary on 'how covid-19 will change the world' calls it a 'crisis of capitalism'.
wrong," he wrote on twitter.
"it's a 'crisis of communism'.
it became a global pandemic through xi's communist regime china. "
while it's debatable how communist modern china actually is, adonis is not alone in his complaint.
numerous western politicians, particularly on the right, have blamed china's government and political system for causing the current global crisis.
many have continued to hammer phrases such as "china flu" or "wuhan virus," despite warnings that such terms could lead to increased hostility against asians.
even those critics who try to avoid ethnically-tinged labels often speak of a "cpc virus" or "xi flu," named after country's ruling party, the communist party of china and its leader, president xi jinping, respectively.
it's safe to say that china's brand has taken a hit due to the virus.
according to pew research, americans' opinion of china is at its lowest point in 15 years, and 62% of those surveyed said they viewed china's power and influence as a "major threat. "
but for some, the beijing model is not necessarily looking so bad.
china, despite being where the virus first emerged, has coped with the ensuing pandemic far better than many other countries, even though those countries had a longer warning time and greater chance to prepare.
the crisis has also highlighted the benefits of a strong government and centralized planning, while -- despite adonis's claims to the contrary -- exposing the limitations of private industry to respond quickly, particularly in the healthcare sector.
in the united states, which is often held up -- for better or worse -- as the example par excellence of a western democracy, the alternative to the chinese model appears to be somewhat chaotic.
far from a strong government, washington has found itself fighting with state officials, facing accusations of pilfering medical supplies and growing calls for greater state power.
meanwhile, us president donald trump has been accused of spreading disinformation and encouraging protests.
speaking to der spiegel earlier this month, german foreign minister heiko maas said the virus had exposed the problems at the heart of both the chinese and us models.
asked which was being proven superior, maas said "neither. "
"china has taken some very authoritarian measures, while in the us, the virus was played down for a long time," he told the magazine.
"there are two extremes, neither of which can be a model for europe. "
new diplomacy while germany may be able to afford to strike out its own path -- and has seen success in dealing with the coronavirus -- other countries, forever pulled between the competing poles of beijing and washington, may be swayed by how the current crisis is playing out.
certainly, china's leaders, and their vast propaganda apparatus, have not been blind to the opportunity this presents.
for weeks state media has been playing up the disorder around the world as it praises beijing's own handling of the crisis, shoring up power and support at home -- but it has also taken aim at those already sympathetic to china who could be pulled further into the fold.
as the us has increasingly looked inward -- both due to the requirements of the crisis and trump's own "america first" instincts -- china has been playing up the importance of "multilateralism," calling for the shoring up of global institutions and offering assistance to anyone that needs it.
in particular, china has emerged as the strongest defendant of the world health organization (who) as it faces pressure from washington.
"the united nations will be 75 this year, covid-19 is reminding countries of the continuous, and increasing value of multilateralism in a closely connected world.
we will only halt covid-19 through solidarity.
no country can do it alone," the communist party-controlled state owned mouthpiece china daily said in an editorial this month.
this advocacy of international cooperation might once have been put forward by the us.
but just as china stepped into the role of free-trade defender as trump pulled back, so too is it attempting to occupy washington's traditional space at the un and other multinational bodies.
since march, xi has had at least two dozen phone calls with other world leaders.
speaking to trump last month, he said that "the international community must respond together if it is to win this battle," according to a readout from beijing.
writing last month, the european union's minister for foreign affairs, josep borrell, said there is an ongoing "global battle of narratives," in which "china is aggressively pushing the message that, unlike the us, it is a responsible and reliable partner. "
in part, borrell said, this was through highlighting its assistance to other countries, such as by sending medical supplies and experts to aid with the coronavirus response.
this coronavirus diplomacy is paying off.
in a tweet (written in chinese) this month, iran's foreign minister javad zarif praised beijing for coming to his country's aid, saying the coronavirus was "deepening the comprehensive strategic partnership between the two countries. "
serbian president aleksander vucic was shown on chinese state broadcaster cgtn kissing the country's flag as he greeted a support team sent from beijing.
"serbian people will never forget this kindness, china is an old friend and will continue to be for generations to come," he said later.
nor is it only beijing's traditional allies expressing their gratitude.
speaking to italian media late last month, the country's ministry of foreign affairs, luigi di maio, said the coronavirus response proved his government's wisdom in signing up to xi's belt and road trade and infrastructure scheme.
"those that mocked us for (that) must now admit that investing in this friendship has allowed us to save lives in italy," di maio said, according to la stampa.
china has been gradually increasing its influence among eu member states, particularly those from eastern europe.
now, as the bloc faces the fallout of what appears to be a bungled coronavirus response, beijing will not want to miss another opportunity to win friends and favors.
china model  discussion of china's influence usually focuses on the country's vast economy, and certainly trade ties have been useful in the past for gaining new allies.
but this isn't the only selling point for beijing's new fans.
just as crises around fake news and online disinformation have made it easier for china to push its model of internet sovereignty -- one that has been happily embraced by those governments already keen to censor online dissent -- so too has the current pandemic provided an opportunity and an excuse to pursue the type of authoritarian power exercised by beijing.
last month, the council of europe warned that hungary -- long the eu's least democratically inclined member -- risked jeopardizing "democracy, rule of law and human rights" in its coronavirus response.
states across the middle east have used the virus as an opportunity to ramp up surveillance and controls on their populations, while in the philippines, a group of lawyers has warned that emergency powers granted to president rodrigo duterte are "tantamount to autocracy. "
but for those pushing these changes, china could be perceived to be a strong argument that an empowered state is what is needed to respond to the pandemic.
regardless of the many valid criticisms of how beijing initially handled the crisis, it appears to have been able to get its domestic epidemic under control and the economy back on track better than many other countries.
the us government, meanwhile, presents something of an uneasy contrast: with a president musing about whether ingesting disinfectants could be used to treat the virus and encouraging protesters to demand an end to quarantine measures.
of course, the us is not the only model of a democracy, and the american system is actually something of an outlier compared to much of the developed world.
nor have other democracies struggled to cope with the virus in the same way: many of the governments praised for their handling of the virus -- taiwan, new zealand, australia, south korea and germany -- are democracies.
it is how a government uses power, not how it has it in the first place, which appears to be the overriding factor in an effective epidemic response.
but just as "communist" china has always been a convenient specter for those railing against left-wing policies or a strong government in the west, so too is "democratic" us a handy foil for opponents of liberalism in china and elsewhere.
brand china may be suffering as a result of the pandemic, but it is not the only one.
beijing also appears to have a greater appreciation than most of its rivals of the potential opportunities presented by the current crisis to emerge stronger and more influential than ever before.
the race to keep tiktok operating in the united states has turned into a saga of intricate dealmaking and political flattery.
it's exactly the kind of scenario that's already par for the course for american companies that want to do business in china (and for those, like facebook and google, that are shut out of the world's second biggest economy).
experts warn that the more washington's playbook starts to mimic beijing's, the more at risk the world's internet is of fracturing beyond repair with enormous implications for global business.
the deal to save tiktok's us business would see walmart and oracle take a minority stake in a us-based company called tiktok global.
while an announcement earlier this month implied that beijing-based bytedance would continue to own most of the short-form video app, developments since then have muddied the waters.
bytedance would itself hold zero percent of the new entity, a person familiar with the deal told cnn business earlier this week.
instead, tiktok global would be partially owned by bytedance's international and chinese investors.
the agreement would make oracle tiktok's "trusted technology partner," and give the california-based tech firm the ability to store the app's american user data and review its source code.
other aspects of the deal have also become heavily politicized.
us president donald trump said last weekend that he asked the companies involved to "do me a favor" by bankrolling a $5 billion education fund to teach people the "real history of our country. "
while it doesn't appear that such a fund will ever materialize, walmart and oracle have promised that the deal would coincidentally result in us tax payments totaling that exact amount.
for american companies that work in china, the broad strokes of this deal might seem familiar.
beijing often forces foreign businesses to form joint ventures with local firms and establish offshoot entities.
"i think there is some era of retaliation here, where, 'hey, if you're going to do this to our companies — shut us out or force us to localize — then we're going to do it to you as well,'" said dipayan ghosh, the co-director of the digital platforms and democracy project at the harvard kennedy school.
more similar to china than europe trump's threat to ban tiktok if the app is not sold to a us company is founded on the fear that otherwise, american user data risks winding up in the hands of the chinese government.
(tiktok has denied this as a possibility and says it keeps us data stateside, with a backup in singapore. )
the fight over tiktok has sparked a political firestorm in the united states.
but it's not exactly an unusual concern overseas, where governments have long been worried about how much access us tech firms have to information about their citizens.
that unease has increased in the years since edward snowden, a former contractor who worked with the us national security agency, revealed in documents leaked to the news media that the american government tapped into people's data through tech companies like microsoft, google and apple.
the european union has for years tussled with us companies over concerns about data privacy and surveillance.
that was a big part of the reason for passing 2018's landmark general data protection regulation (gdpr), which gave consumers much more control over their personal data and forced companies to ensure that the way they collect, process and store data is safe.
europe has continued to strengthen its privacy laws, and this summer struck down an agreement that allowed companies to move data between europe and the united states over concerns that it did not sufficiently protect europeans from us surveillance.
now that the united states has been forced to reckon with a foreign company that has broad access to us user data, though, the country is taking an approach that resembles china's far more than it does europe's.
american companies have known for decades that working with china requires a lot of sacrifice.
microsoft, which has a longstanding history in the country, agreed to give the chinese government access to its source code in 2003 to address national security concerns.
the company said at the time that sharing that information was intended to help foreign governments "be confident in the security of the windows platform. "
the steps taken by other us firms that have access to chinese user data bear resemblance to the tiktok proposal in other ways.
apple's icloud services in mainland china are operated by a chinese company, for example.
the silicon valley firm was forced to do so to comply with the country's cybersecurity rules, which require companies to store data on chinese users domestically.
"the us is copying what the chinese have done," said james lewis, a senior vice president at the center for strategic and international studies, a think tank based in washington, d. c.  "trump is taking a nationalistic approach. "
a nationalistic america that way of doing things has consequences, though.
experts have for months been warning that tensions between the united states and china are creating a world where tech firms are viewed more as national actors instead of multinational ones.
and as the relationship between the world's two largest economies deteriorates, the fallout risks creating what eurasia group once called a "new virtual berlin wall. "
"the us was always about the international system and following the rules," lewis said.
"a more nationalistic america is harder for everyone, not just the chinese. "
after all, china's philosophy on technology led the country to create its great firewall, a massive censorship mechanism that shuts out content widely available elsewhere on the internet.
beijing closely monitors and manages that system, having realized the potential for the internet to impact the way its populace views the world.
when the internet was invented more than 30 years ago and became commercialized in the decades afterward, "we thought of this as a platform over which any person in the world can communicate with anyone else in the world," said ghosh of the harvard kennedy school.
he added that closing off the web could sow division worldwide.
washington has increasingly indicated that it is willing to head down that path, though.
in august, us secretary of state mike pompeo said the government would seek to restrict the reach of chinese companies in the united states by banning them from app stores, cloud services and other digital networks.
"what worries me is that the us is becoming china by trying to block off apps," said susan ariel aaronson, a professor at george washington university, where she directs a digital trade and data governance hub.
"we too are censoring; we too are intervening in the markets for data. "
many experts have pointed out that the united states has legitimate concerns when it comes to safeguarding the data of american citizens.
instead of singling out chinese companies, though, they say the united states should develop universal standards for data collection and use.
ghosh, for example, said a european approach, like a us version of gdpr, may be the right way forward.
"what that means is that if you want to do business with american consumers over the internet, you have to be subject to these general baseline privacy restrictions," he said.
that may include giving citizens the right to delete data or to be "forgotten," a measure that allows citizens to request that links containing personal information about them be removed from search results.
whatever washington decides, though, the country's actions are likely to set a powerful precedent.
take india, for example, which has already banned a bunch of chinese apps during a broader geopolitical tussle.
"if we continue to play the game of whack-a-mole with chinese apps that are perceived as a threat, i don't think that makes us anymore secure," said samm sacks, a fellow at the washington, d. c. -based think tank new america who studies cybersecurity and us-china relations.
"i think that what that does is it creates a ripple effect, where other countries around the world will say, 'this is a blueprint on how to block a powerful technology company under the guise of national security. '"
