5 things to know for June 8: George Floyd, police reform, coronavirus, economy, China.
the mayor of brazil's amazonian city of manaus, arthur virgílio neto, was discharged from hospital wednesday nearly one month after contracting covid-19.
"arthur concluded his medical treatment in são paulo," said a note published by the city hall.
the mayor was transferred to a são paulo hospital for treatment on july 6 with his wife, who had also tested positive for the virus, according to a previous statement from his office.
the mayor has been a vocal critic of brazilian president jair bolsonaro during the pandemic.
in a profanity-laced video of a cabinet meeting released by brazil's supreme court in may, bolsonaro referred to virgílio neto as a "piece of sh**" for digging mass graves in his city during the coronavirus pandemic.
health crisis: manaus is the capital of amazonas, a northern state in brazil.
it was the first state capital to see its hospital system collapse due to the coronavirus outbreak.
last week, amazonas state recorded 5,560 new cases, down from 11,758 new infections a week at the end of may.
the state's death toll now stands at 3,232, with seven deaths in the past 24 hours.
##hotspots## ##politics## north korea has tested 1,211 people for coronavirus as of july 16, with all results returned negative, the world health organization's representative to north korea dr.  edwin salvador told cnn.
all educational institutions in the country -- including pre-schools -- are now on extended summer break for the next two months, salvador said.
currently, 696 north koreans are under quarantine.
they are all laborers and loaders working at the nampo port on the country's western coast and the sinuiju-dandong border between north korea and china, salvador said.
"the increase in the number of people quarantined is due to the increased volume of goods coming into the country through nampo and sinuiju-dangdong routes.
medicines and medical products such as vaccines and covid-19 related items are given high priority to be transported across the border," salvador said.
according to who, 15 laboratories are designated for coronavirus testing in north korea, including provincial laboratories.
the central hygiene anti-epidemic institute remains the reference laboratory.
primers and probes for pcr machines to facilitate 1,000 tests, sent from who's southeast asia regional office, have arrived in north korea, salvador said, adding that who had earlier provided 900 pieces of personal protective equipment along with laboratory reagents.
north korea is also checking people's temperature using infrared thermometers, providing hand-washing facilities and sanitizer in all public places including shopping malls, restaurants, and hotels.
public announcements on covid-19 information are made over tv, radio, print media as well as loudspeakers, salvador said.
suspected case: north korean leader kim jong un convened an emergency meeting saturday after it was reported that a defector who fled the country three years ago had returned to the north korean city of kaesong, while possibly infected with coronavirus, according to state-run newswire kcna.
few experts believe that north korea, a country of nearly 25 million people which shares a border with china, could have escaped the effects of a pandemic that has infected more than 16 million people worldwide and killed nearly 650,000.  the australian state of victoria recorded 723 new covid-19 cases on wednesday, setting a new daily high for the state and the whole country, according to numbers delivered by premier daniel andrews on thursday.
victoria, australia's second most populous state, has so far diagnosed 9,998 cases, accounting for more than 60% of the country's total number of infections.
the state now has 5,385 active cases, with more than 80% of them in metropolitan melbourne and neighboring mitchell shire -- both subject to a stay-at-home order.
andrews announced 13 further fatalities recorded wednesday, another single-day high for the country, bringing the state's death toll to 105 and australia's to 189.  wednesday's new cases were found through 19,921 tests conducted across the state.
stricter measures: on thursday, andrews announced that from midnight sunday, a mandate to wear masks or face coverings in public will extend from metropolitan melbourne and mitchell shire to the rest of the state.
a ban on home gatherings has been extended to six further areas of victoria, andrews said, noting that household to household transmission was a factor in the rising numbers.
"today is not a good day, andrews wrote in a statement.
"this is one of the biggest challenges our state has faced.
and yet, really, we're all being asked to make the smallest of sacrifices.
by not seeing your mate, you might be saving their life.
by not hugging your mum, you might be keeping her alive. "
##hotspots## china recorded more than 100 new coronavirus cases for a second consecutive day on wednesday, according to the country's national health commission.
among the 105 new cases -- the highest number the country has seen since it brought the virus largely under control in march -- 102 were locally transmitted.
some 96 local infections were found in the far western region of xinjiang, one in beijing, with the remaining cases confirmed in liaoning.
the nhc also recorded a further 21 asymptomatic infections, which are not included in the total tally of confirmed cases.
tuesday marked the first time china had recorded over 100 new cases since early april.
##hotspots## the house sergeant at arms and attending physician have issued rules, "upon the direction of the speaker of the house," requiring face coverings in all house office buildings effective at 8 a. m.  et thursday.
there are some exceptions, such as when a person is eating or drinking, or when a person is giving a speech or interview provided no one is within six feet.
"any person not wearing a face cover will be asked to put on a face cover or leave the building," the memo announcing the policy says.
the rules come just a few hours after house speaker nancy pelosi announced that face coverings would be required on the house floor.
attorney general william barr tested negative for covid-19 today, according to a justice department official.
barr, who is routinely tested, attended a house judiciary committee hearing tuesday in which rep.  louie gohmert was present.
gohmert has tested positive for covid-19.
the congressman was seen maskless outside the room near barr briefly at one point.
the united states golf association has announced that the 120th us open championship, which is scheduled september 17-20 at winged foot golf club in mamaroneck, new york, will take place without spectators.
"following months of consultation and scenario planning with local and state health officials, we have jointly decided that hosting the us open without spectators will provide the best opportunity to conduct the championship safely for all involved," said mike davis, ceo of the usga, in the press release.
"we will miss the excitement of the fans and what their presence brings to the championship.
we look forward to welcoming them again to future us opens. "
some context: the usga announced on april 6 that the us open, which was scheduled to be held june 18-21 on winged foot's west course, had been postponed to september.
the organization also said in june that the championship would be conducted without traditional qualifying.
mexico recorded 485 new deaths from covid-19 wednesday, bringing the country's death toll to 45,361, according to the country's health ministry.
mexico has the fourth highest death toll from the virus worldwide, behind the uk, brazil and us.
the health ministry also reported 5,752 new covid-19 cases, bringing mexico's total to 408,449.  italy has extended the state of emergency imposed in the country due to the coronavirus outbreak until oct.  15, according to a government statement released early thursday morning local time.
"the council of ministers, on the proposal of president giuseppe conte, approved the extension," the statement read.
italy was one of the first european countries to be hit by the virus and went into a state of emergency on jan.  31.    the legal framework gives the government special powers to curb certain freedoms and access to additional resources to stop and contain the spread of covid-19.
the latest numbers: the country has so far recorded 246,776 coronavirus cases and 35,129 deaths, according to johns hopkins university data.
the resurgence in coronavirus infections in states across the south and west is now moving into midwestern states, dr.  anthony fauci, the head of the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases, said wednesday in an interview on msnbc.
in florida, texas, arizona, california, an increase in the percentage of coronavirus tests coming back positive signaled a later resurgence, fauci said.
"we're starting to see that in some of the states now, kentucky, tennessee, ohio, indiana and other states," he added.
fauci said the white house coronavirus task force warned the governors in a conference call tuesday that they need to get out ahead of the curve.
"because what we're seeing now is what actually took place a couple of weeks ago and what we're going to see a couple of weeks from now, is what we're doing now," he said.
"what inevitably is going to happen is that the states that are not yet in trouble, will likely get into trouble," fauci added.
"and that's one of the things that's kind of tough to comprehend, that you look around you and it looks like you're doing okay but if you're not getting your arms around and suppressing that surge that's coming up, that's just a little bit below the radar screen, before you know it, two to three weeks down the pike, you're in trouble. "
the states experiencing a resurgence need to take a look at the reopening guidelines, fauci said, emphasizing the need to adhere to a phased reopening.
"not all the states did that and even in the states that did, some of the people in the states didn't listen to what the suggestions in the guidelines were.
so, what we're dealing with now is we want to make sure that as we start seeing these surges, you may need to go back a little," he said.
fauci said he didn't believe moving back to a complete shutdown is necessary.
"i think psychologically that would be really very difficult for people to accept but what we can do is, if you're going to quickly call a pause, a timeout and think maybe you want to backtrack a little, not necessarily all the way back to shut down, but enough to regain your footing, so that you then proceed to open in a much more cautious fashion. "
##hotspots## the us food and drug administration could issue emergency use authorization (eua) of a coronavirus vaccine in a matter of weeks, once a vaccine meets efficacy requirements, dr.  peter marks, director of the fda center for biologics evaluation and research, which approves vaccines, said wednesday.
"we stand ready for using emergency use authorization in an appropriate setting," marks said during an online event called the disease control and prevention summit.
an eua would green light a coronavirus vaccine for use on an expedited basis.
marks said the increased attention the agency is giving to coronavirus vaccine trials should speed up the process of granting emergency use authorization to a vaccine that crosses an efficacy boundary in a clinical trial.
"we'd like to hope that when that happens, it will be a matter of weeks before we could actually potentially have something like an emergency use authorization," said marks, who added that he hopes the eua will apply to a relatively broad population.
"emergency use authorization will be for the population for which we have appropriate data. "
marks emphasized that safety will not be sacrificed in the race for a vaccine.
"the first vaccines that come along may be slightly disadvantaged compared to ones that come along later," said marks, who suspects the "trailblazer" vaccines will reveal information that can speed up the process for subsequent vaccine candidates.
some context: two potential vaccines started advanced trials this week in the us.
"there are aspirational timelines, and i think that's actually wonderful here, that people have aspirations for moving forward as quickly as possible, but we all know that real life generally does not go as well as our aspirations," marks said.
clarification: an earlier version of this headline failed to specify the fda would issue an emergency authorization once a coronavirus vaccine meets safety and efficacy requirements.
##vaccines## texas has now surpassed new york in total coronavirus cases, according to johns hopkins university data.
johns hopkins now reports a total of 417,098 total cases across texas since the start of the pandemic.
new york state has 413,593 total cases across as of wednesday.
florida, texas, and new york are behind california, which currently leads the country with 475,806 total cases, according to johns hopkins university.
##hotspots## the brazilian government is allowing foreigners to enter the country by air travel, according to a decree issued hours after the country reported a record number of new coronavirus cases and deaths.
the decision will go into effect immediately.
the decree was signed by four ministers, including minister of health eduardo pazuello, and was published wednesday in brazil's official gazette.
foreigners were previously banned from entering brazil since the beginning of the covid-19 outbreak in march.
road and water travel is still banned for the next 30 days, according to the decree.
the latest numbers: brazil saw new records on coronavirus figures wednesday.
in the last 24 hours, 69,075 new cases and 1,595 new deaths were registered by the health ministry.
brazil has reported 2,552,265 covid-19 cases and 90,0134 deaths since the pandemic began.
##hotspots## dr.  ashish jha, the director of the harvard global health institute, said "it's time for a paradigm shift" when it comes to covid-19 testing in the us.
he said the federal government needs to step in and distribute faster antigen tests to power through the backlog of testing and get ahead of outbreaks, according to an opinion piece he penned for time magazine.
with current covid-19 testing results delayed by days, and in many cases more than a week, due to a critical shortage in testing supplies, jha said testing is practically useless in identifying who has the virus.
if health officials can't quickly determine who has the virus and where it is, they can't prevent the spread, jha wrote in the op-ed.
"it's time to radically rethink our approach to testing," jha said.
the country needs to switch to faster antigen tests that can quickly return test results, even though the results are not as accurate as the slower polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test, he said.
pcr tests require amplification of the virus, a time-consuming process, while antigen tests look for proteins made by the virus.
"by putting a premium on the accuracy of tests, we fail to test a majority of people with covid-19 and these built in delays actually undermine our ability to timely identify cases which is the key purpose for widespread testing," jha wrote in the commentary.
the earliest global spread of the novel coronavirus came from travel involving mostly three countries: china, italy and iran, researchers reported wednesday.
three-quarters of cases reported outside of china in january and february were linked to travelers from an affected country, mostly those three, a team at the us centers for disease control and prevention found.
"cases with travel links to china, italy, or iran accounted for almost two-thirds of the first reported covid-19 cases from affected countries," the cdc's dr.  fatimah dawood and colleagues wrote in the journal lancet infectious diseases.
"our findings suggest that travel from just a few countries with substantial sars-cov-2 transmission may have seeded additional outbreaks around the world before the characterization of covid-19 as a pandemic on march 11, 2020," dawood added in a statement.
the team went through online reports from national ministries of health and other government agency websites, social media feeds, and news releases to tally up all coronavirus cases reported between december 31 and march 10.  half of the early cases in africa were linked to travel from italy, they found.
travelers from italy also carried the virus in a third of the earliest cases elsewhere in europe and the americas.
the analysis also showed that large gatherings were a source of spread.
"four large clusters in our analysis, and large outbreaks reported elsewhere, have been linked with transmission in faith-based settings, highlighting the need to partner with faith-based organizations when designing and implementing community mitigation efforts," the cdc's dr.  philip ricks, who worked on the analysis, said in a statement.
"six healthcare-associated clusters were also identified, underscoring the need for strict infection prevention and control practices and monitoring health-care workers for signs of illness. "
while many studies have confirmed that the virus originated in china, genetic analysis shows that a new strain arose in europe, likely italy, early in the pandemic and that strain predominated in the us.
the broward county sheriff department carried out 25 arrests and issued 260 citations as part of an ongoing operation aimed at reducing the spread of covid-19, the department said today.
the arrests and citations were part of an effort to prevent crime as well as crackdown on large gatherings and parties, the department added.
the operation followed several shooting incidents in connection to large party gatherings and the agency decided to take a "very aggressive stance" with "zero tolerance," sheriff gregory tony told reporters during a virtual news conference.
"this operation has been very pivotal in our ability not only just to break up the crime patterns that we're seeing, but also for helping reduce the spread of covid-19," tony said.
##hotspots## last week, rep.  chip roy, a republican from texas, was on the house floor interacting at length with rep.  louie gohmert who has since tested positive for covid-19.
neither men were wearing masks.
today, roy was in the house and wearing a mask.
he said he isn't going to isolate and wasn't worried about contracting the virus.
"i'm not concerned," roy said.
roy says he's not concerned "anymore than the interactions with perfect strangers on an airplane with circulating air.
with cotton masks on an airplane, where everybody is pretending like they're doing something noble to try to save people from a virus on a cylinder with 50 people on it flying through the air. "
"my question to you all is how are people wearing a cotton mask on an airplane saving you from circulating virus on an airplane?"
he added.
roy contended he's "happy to wear a mask" and is not skeptical of the us centers for disease control and prevention but questioned whether a "thin piece of cotton" on someone's face — often with a valve — is enough to prevent the virus from spreading.
he argued there are doctors who raise questions about the effectiveness.
"but my question here is we act like wearing this thin piece of cotton, then everybody gets the blessing that they're somehow saving everybody," he said.
courses for all undergraduate and graduate students at georgetown university will begin all online for the fall semester, according to a letter from university president john j.  degioia.
he cited the acceleration of covid-19 and increasing restrictions on travel between states for the move to online instruction in his letter wednesday.
the decision marks a reversal for georgetown, which earlier this month planned to welcome back about 2,000 undergraduate students to campus.
"this was a very difficult decision — and one that i know will disappoint members of our community who have been eagerly anticipating a return to campus," said degioia.
"we plan to introduce in-person course elements as soon as health conditions permit. "
degioia outlined the travel restrictions put in place by washington, dc, mayor muriel bowser, which require 14 days of quarantine for travelers from 27 states.
"these developments indicate a strain on our public health framework," degioia said, adding that maryland, dc, and virginia have also been designated as "high-risk" areas by other states throughout the country.
##schools## nba commissioner adam silver today said the leagues' fight to operate in a bubble amid a worsening pandemic in florida is going well, but warned he is willing to end the season if he believes the virus poses a significant health risk to players or personnel.
"no question," replied silver, when asked by cnn's wolf blitzer if he'd end the season if it was "the right thing to do. "
"we have a panel of expert immunologists, infectious disease experts, public health experts and really they would make the decision frankly," he said.
"it would not be a business decision. "
silver also outlined the extensive measures the league has put in place inside its so-called bubble in orlando, florida, saying there are nightly tests and players are expected to wear masks at all times except when they are on the court playing basketball.
he also warned, however, the plan is not bulletproof.
"we're protected in essence from the high case rate around us but it's not a hermetically sealed bubble of any kind .
.
.
[but] so far we've been in there for roughy three weeks and we've had zero cases," he said.
watch more: new mexico's coronavirus case count topped 20,000 on wednesday after adding 352 new covid-19 cases.
the state is now reporting a total of 20,136 coronavirus cases.
some context: the milestone comes two days after new mexico reported a new one-day record of confirmed cases, with 467.  note: the figures above were released by the new mexico department of health and may not line up exactly in real time with cnn's database drawn from johns hopkins university and the covid tracking project.
speaker of the house nancy pelosi has announced a new mandatory mask policy requiring all members and staff to wear face covering in the house.
"members and staff will be required to wear masks in the halls of the house," she said during remarks on the house floor.
lawmakers can take off their masks temporarily when they are speaking, pelosi added.
members and staff will not be allowed in the house if they don't wear masks.
the speaker said she has the authority to direct the house sergeant-at-arms to tell members to leave if they aren't wearing a face covering.
florida's state-supported covid-19 testing sites will temporarily close in anticipation of a potential tropical storm, the florida division of emergency management (fdem) announced wednesday.
the agency said drive-thru and walk-up covid-19 testing sites will temporarily close at 5 p. m.  on thursday in anticipation of impacts from potential tropical cyclone nine, the storm currently located at sea in the southeastern part of the caribbean.
the fdem said it made the decision "out of an abundance of caution to keep individuals operating and attending the sites safe.
all sites have free standing structures including tents and other equipment, which cannot withstand tropical storm force winds, and could cause damage to people and property if not secured. "
the storm is expected to begin impacting south florida as early as friday with heavy rains and strong winds, according to the agency.
all states-supported covid-19 testing sites "will remain closed until they are safe to reopen, with all sites anticipated to be reopened at the latest by 8 a. m.  on aug.  5," according to a fdem statement.
minnesota has 310 people who are currently hospitalized due to covid-19, including 143 in intensive care units, according to the state's department of health.
"the last time we had hospitalization and icu, icu usage, this high was a month ago," said kris ehresmann, the director of minnesota's department of health infectious disease.
"the bottom line is that yet we're continuing to see more cases in bars and restaurants.
so certainly the ones that you've heard about, but we've added many more. "
the median age for these establishments are people in their 20s, ehresmann said.
she added that the state is also seeing cases from social gatherings.
by the numbers: minnesota has reported 52,947 positive cases of coronavirus and 1,589 deaths since the pandemic began, ehresmann said.
"the ultimate success or failure of this coincides is largely in the hands of each and every individual minnesota.
no one in minnesota is on the sidelines, but the fights are all directly involved and have choices to make every time," she said.
note: the numbers above were released by the minnesota department of health and may not line up exactly in real time with cnn's database drawn from johns hopkins university and the covid tracking project.
the us needs to reset its response with policy actions at the federal, state and local level to get control of the covid-19 pandemic, scholars at the johns hopkins university center for health security said in a new report wednesday.
"unlike many countries in the world, the united states is not currently on course to get control of this epidemic," the report says.
"it is time to reset. "
the report includes 10 recommendations that include universal mask mandates, federal leadership to improve testing and, in places where transmission is worsening, stay-at-home orders.
nonpharmaceutical measures, like universal mask use and social distancing, should be the same in the us as they have been in other successful countries around the world.
without these, it will be difficult to maintain control on outbreaks.
the report says state, local and federal leaders should mandate non-medical mask use in public and limit large indoor gatherings.
leaders at all levels should also "speak in unison in support of these core public health approaches to controlling this disease. "
states should stop high risk activities and settings in areas that have rising test positivity, but no signs of crisis in hospitals or rising deaths.
in areas where the situation is worse, stay-at-home orders should be reinstated, the report says.
the us response to the epidemic will be severely constrained without a reliable and efficient testing system, the report says.
one of the things the authors suggest to combat this is the federal government working with states and commercial labs to identify challenges in quickly returning tests and work out a way to overcome these.
a vaccine will "dramatically change the course of the response and offer the opportunity to enhance protection of those most vulnerable individuals," the report says.
there is also a lot to be done around community acceptance of any eventual coronavirus vaccine, the report says.
"with misinformation and vaccine hesitancy remaining prominent issues affecting public health, vaccination campaigns will not be successful if they are not executed with sensitivity to the current climate around trust of public institutions and if they do not incorporate multidisciplinary expertise in decision-making groups," the report says.
education secretary betsy devos argued wednesday against the need for national leadership on reopening schools, praising one private academy for not waiting for guidance on how to reopen safely.
"you know, there's not a national superintendent nor should there be, therefore there's not a national plan for reopening," devos said at a roundtable on schools in north carolina with vice president mike pence.
the event was held at thales academy, a year-round private school where pence and devos also met with a small classroom of fourth graders.
"thales is a great example more schools could emulate," devos said.
"you didn't wait for guidance from the department of education.
you didn't ask for permission.
your families wanted kids back in school, you wanted kids back in school, teachers wanted to be back in school, so you figured out ways to do it, or do it safely. "
private schools in general have smaller class sizes than most public schools, just one reason why it could be easier for them to create reopening plans.
"more education leaders here in north carolina can pivot as well, and do what it takes to keep everyone safe and do what's right for all students," devos continued.
"there's too many schools in this state and others that are ignoring parents and students and keeping schools closed. "
she went on to argue for school choice, and said that for parents who took their children out of public schools, "the tax dollars meant to support their education should go with them. "
devos said she'd called for school choice for more than three decades, and added that the pandemic "really welcomes it. "
"it frankly demands it," devos said.
"students need it, families are demanding it, and teachers need it. "
##schools## white house chief of staff mark meadows told reporters wednesday that – as negotiations on a stimulus package continue to fall apart – he doesn't know that there is any other plan other than "no deal. "
"no deal certainly becomes a greater possibility the longer these negotiations take," he said.
meadows emerged from house speaker nancy pelosi's office this afternoon with a dire assessment of where negotiations stand, saying they made no progress.
pelosi rejected the short-term unemployment insurance idea and the federal enhancement of unemployment, which will expire at the end of the week.
asked what would unlock the current impasse, meadows said, "i don't know that anything does. "
more from the capitol: senate democratic leader chuck schumer, after meeting with top white house negotiators on the next round of coronavirus relief legislation, explicitly rejected any short-term measure to extend the expiring federal unemployment enhancement and attacked republicans for having no plan to address the issues.
schumer, after the third meeting in as many days, said republicans are "tied in a knot because of the disunity in their caucus, because of their inability to gather votes, because the president says one thing one day and says another thing the other. "
"they have no coherent plan, they have no comprehensive plan," schumer said.
"they have tried to come up with a 'skinny bill' that doesn't address the moment and they can't even pass that in their own senate. "
all indoor bar areas in minneapolis must close for regular service starting aug.  1, according to an emergency regulation issued by mayor jacob frey.
"the data has become clear that in both urban and rural areas, bars are very high-risk locations for covid-19 outbreaks in minneapolis," frey said.
"we know at least nine bars that have been tied to patron outbreaks.
at least three bars have been tied to employee outbreaks. "
frey said that since bars and restaurants have been open, the city has seen its seven-day weekly average go up "pretty significantly. "
"a night out at the bar is too often leading to nights in the hospital for family, for friends, and for neighbors," he added.
"by focusing on bar areas, which are proven to be hotbeds for congregation and community spread, we can help keep both minneapolis and minnesotans safe and help keep trends stable. "
the closure would also cover taprooms, distilleries, and nightclubs, frey said.
restaurants with a bar area are also required to keep their bars closed for the duration of the emergency regulations.
there have been at least 403,307 cases of covid-19 in texas since the start of the pandemic, according to the latest figures released by the department of state health services.
this is an increase of 9,042 from tuesday's report, according to the dashboard.
at least 9,595 covid-19 patients are hospitalized statewide, according to the department's dashboard.
the department also said at least 6,190 people have died from the virus in the state since the pandemic started.
note: these numbers were released by texas department of state health services and may not line up exactly in real time with cnn's database drawn from johns hopkins university and the covid tracking project.
##hotspots## denver public schools will "extend 100% remote instruction" from the start of the school year until the end of the first quarter, a statement on the district's website announced wednesday.
remote instruction will begin on aug.  24 and run through at least oct.  16, which is the end of the first quarter of the school year, the statement said.
"we'll be working hard to safely and gradually welcome all students back into schools, when health conditions allow," district superintendent susana cordova wrote in the statement.
however, the district did say that it will be working toward bringing back small groups of students for in-person learning as soon as sept.  8.   some more context: this announcement comes two weeks after the district said they would delay the start of the school year to aug.  24 and it clarifies that remote learning will last at least until the end of the first quarter.
the district initially said that its plan was to return to full, in-person instruction on june 26.  denver public schools has nearly 94,000 students who attend 207 schools, according to the district's website.
##schools## the national basketball association has unveiled a new community testing program, which will provide thousands of no-cost covid-19 tests in orlando and team markets nationwide.
the program is an extension of the nba's together initiative, the league's community and social engagement campaign designed to support, educate and inspire youth, families and fans in response to the pandemic.
in a statement released wednesday, the nba said, "public health data has made clear that the impacts of the coronavirus are most concentrated in historically marginalized communities of color where access to testing is scarce.
to meet this need, the nba collaborated with unidosus and the national urban league as well as several private laboratories to identify communities most in need and provide access to no-cost programs in addition to communicating public health information to community members. "
the tests are being provided in partnership with bioreference laboratories, the league's testing provider at its campus in orlando.
residents in the orlando area can register for the free covid-19 tests here.
the nba added that it will continue to work with unidosus and the national urban league "to continue to explore additional testing programs and work together to amplify the latest global health and safety information. "
fifty-six percent of all new covid-19 cases in maryland are in people under the age of 40, gov.
larry hogan said at a news conference today.
the positivity rate of marylanders 35 and older has been declining for more than 12 weeks, but people under the age of 35 are testing positive at a rate 76.
8% higher than that of people 35 and older.
hospitalizations have increased 28% in the past two weeks.
a total of 571 people have been hospitalized, hogan added.
maryland has 145 intensive care unit beds currently in use and has seen the uptick in acute care beds mostly in younger people.
note: these numbers were released by maryland gov.
larry hogan, and may not line up exactly in real time with cnn's database drawn from johns hopkins university and the covid tracking project.
face masks must be worn in all state government offices and buildings in south carolina starting monday, gov.
henry mcmaster announced wednesday.
during a news conference in columbia, mcmaster told reporters that starting monday, restaurants will be required to "limit customer service" and have no more than 50% occupancy.
"restaurant employees and patrons will be required by law to a mask or face coverings" in order to slow down the spread of  coronavirus.
tables are required by law to be six feet apart with no more than eight people per table, mcmaster said.
the south carolina department of health and environmental control announced 1,666 new confirmed covid-19 cases and 48 additional deaths on wednesday.
this brings the total number of confirmed cases to 85,423 and confirmed deaths to 1,551.  republican rep.  louie gohmert, who was supposed to travel to texas with president trump today but tested positive during a pre-flight screening, issued a video statement on twitter saying, "the reports of my demise are a great deal premature. "
"i'm asymptomatic.
i don't have any of the symptoms that are listed as part of covid-19, but apparently i have the wuhan virus," gohmert said.
he went on to say that republican sen.  rand paul told him that he should be "immune" in 10 days or so.
"rand paul was just texting me that the good news is that in 10 days or so i should be, really well, immune," he said in the video statement.
cnn has reached out to paul's office.
more than 150,000 people have died in the united states from coronavirus, according to the latest data compiled by johns hopkins university.
there are at least 150,034 deaths and 4,396,030 cases across the country so far.
the first death in the us was reported on february 29:  the country reached 50,000 deaths 54 days later on april 23.  
the country crossed 100,000 death 34 days later on may 27.  
it has taken 63 days to add another 50,000 to reach the 150,000 mark.
##hotspots## although the ideal covid-19 vaccine would completely prevent infection, a shot that reduces severe illness and mortality is still a success, naor bar-zeev, deputy director of the international vaccine access center at johns hopkins university, said wednesday.
"the best ideal candidate would be reducing infection and transmission in the community, and that would eventually result in herd protection," he said, speaking at a johns hopkins briefing.
"if we have a vaccine that reduces mortality and makes this whole pandemic a milder one, that's also a success. "
herd immunity, which is when enough of a population is immune to an infectious disease that the spread from person to person is unlikely, is not on the cards for the next few years, bar-zeev said, as the number of doses available of vaccine will be insufficient to produce it.
"what we want to do is reduce severe disease among the people at highest risk," he said.
"so a vaccine that does that but allows infection to carry on, you know causing a mild cold, fantastic, bring it on, that's wonderful. "
he also pointed out that herd immunity would require more than just an effective vaccine.
it also requires community participation and coverage.
"if 50% of americans don't want to be vaccinated, for example, because of hesitancy or safety concerns, then even a 100% effective vaccine won't achieve herd immunity," he said.
##vaccines## at least 12 additional new york city bars have had their liquor licenses suspended for "egregious violations" of covid-19 regulations, new york gov.
andrew cuomo's office announced wednesday.
so far, 57 businesses have had licenses suspended for these violations, part of the state's continued crackdown on businesses not enforcing coronavirus guidelines.
the state police and the liquor board authority have done 1,131 compliance checks so far this week, and have cited 55 violations at establishments, which can carry a fine of up to $10,000 per violation.
governments and individuals need to put "sustained pressure" on covid-19 to reduce transmission and exposure, dr.  mike ryan, executive director of the world health organization's health emergencies program, said on wednesday.
asked if countries are seeing a second wave of the virus, ryan said during a q&a on social media: "there has been this perception that this disease would behave a little bit like influenza, and it would have a natural peak and then it would disappear for a while, and then it would come back in the northern hemisphere in the autumn.
i think we've always said that we didn't know that. "
ryan compared the behavior of the virus to a spring, explaining, "when we push the virus down, we suppress transmission.
release pressure, it bounces back up.
now you could call that a second peak, a second wave, you can call it what you like.
what it means to me is this [virus] requires sustained pressure to reduce transmission, and it requires sustained commitment to reduce exposure. "
"i would say that there is no second wave as such.
what we're seeing is the virus naturally re-emerging when we take the pressure off," ryan later added.
the who official called on governments to work on suppressing transmission through testing, contact tracing and quarantining, while communities and individuals "need to do everything they can to reduce their exposure to the virus. "
"in countries where we've seen well-managed efforts on the part of governments to suppress transmission.
and where we've seen communities empowered to reduce their exposure, we see success," ryan said.
rep.  francis rooney, a retiring florida republican, became the first gop house member to vote by proxy during the pandemic this afternoon.
rep.  don beyer, a virginia democrat, cast rooney's vote on a procedural matter for him.
some context: republicans have attacked the proxy voting rules for months, saying members should have to be physically present to vote.
rooney had previously indicated he could make use of the remote voting provisions when he designated beyer as his proxy, but he has not actually cast a vote by proxy until now.
beyer's communications director wrote that there were "audible gasps in the chamber" when beyer cast rooney's vote for him.
the last time rooney voted in the house was in february, according to his house website.
penn state university has announced that eight student-athletes of the 466 tested as part of the school's return to campus protocol have tested positive for covid-19.
the tests were completed as of july 24, with 66 results still pending.
"the health and safety of our student-athletes, coaches, staff and the broader community are of the utmost importance," the university said in a statement.
"therefore, as part of the protocols established in the return to campus plan by the penn state athletics medical staff and in consultation with university, local and national officials and guidelines, individuals with a positive test have been put into isolation for 14 days and will be retested at that point. "
in addition to the isolation measures, university officials said contact tracing measures have been implemented, which include quarantine and testing for individuals who might have been exposed.
california is breaking a grim record, reporting 197 covid-related deaths in a single day, according to the state's department of public health.
this report far outpaces the previous high of 159 from just last week.
"tragically, california surpassed another somber milestone today: 197 deaths.
our highest reported in a single day," gov.
gavin newsom tweeted.
also climbing in the state are daily cases.
california added 8,755 new cases, bringing the state's cumulative total to 475,305 cases.
today's marked increase in cases may be the result of a backlog in test results, as noted by health secretary mark ghaly tuesday.
the positivity rate appears steady at 7.
4% over the past 14 days.
nearly 100,000 tests were conducted yesterday and more than 7.
5 million have been performed in california to date.
hospitalization rates also remain stable over the past several days.
los angeles county still holds the most coronavirus cases in the state, but as cases climb elsewhere, it currently makes up for only about 37% of all california cases, down from nearly 50% earlier in the pandemic.
that may be short-lived as los angeles county public health "anticipates receiving a backlog in cases in the coming days due to previous reporting delays in the state electronic lab system. "
note: these numbers were released by california department of public health, and may not line up exactly in real time with cnn's database drawn from johns hopkins university and the covid tracking project.
##hotspots## france reported 1,392 new coronavirus cases on wednesday, representing the highest daily increase in cases in more than a month, according to the latest data from the french national health agency.
the total number of confirmed coronavirus cases in france now stands at 185,196, according to the national health agency.
there was also 15 more deaths related to covid-19, bringing the death toll to 30,238.  the health agency data also said the number of coronavirus patients in the hospital is steadily decreasing.
some context: the national health agency said wednesday that the circulation of the virus is still increasing, and the coronavirus reproduction rate (r rate) in france is now above 1.
3.
"aside from the slowly declining intensive care unit occupancy rate, indicators for the covid-19 pandemic show an increase in the virus circulation," the national health agency said in a statement.
"the health crisis is not over," french government spokesperson gabriel attal said during a wednesday news conference.
"we have seen our neighbors toughening their measures.
we will continue to adapt the rules in the days and weeks to come depending on the evolution of the epidemic. "
wearing face masks in indoor public spaces has been mandatory in france since july 20.  new york city has 18,887 confirmed coronavirus deaths and 4,625 probable coronavirus deaths as of july 29, according to the most recent data on the city website.
the new york city health department defines probable deaths as people who did not have a positive covid-19 laboratory test, but their death certificate lists as the cause of death "covid-19" or an equivalent.
the total number of confirmed coronavirus deaths and probable coronavirus deaths in new york city is 23,512.  more details: there have been at least 221,220 coronavirus cases in the city and 56,099 people have been hospitalized, according to the city.
the data is from the new york city health department and was updated on july 29 at 1 p. m.  et, according to the website.
note: the numbers may not line up exactly in real time with cnn's database drawn from johns hopkins university and the covid tracking project.
the indianapolis public schools administration is recommending that the upcoming school year begin with 100% remote learning for all students when school starts on august 17.  this marks a reversal from the district's previous plan to start with a hybrid option of some in-person and some remote learning.
the first day of school had already been pushed back by two weeks.
the recommendation, which was announced in a press release wednesday, will be heard and voted on by the board of education on thursday.
if approved, in-person learning will be delayed until at least october, "which will allow more time for the number of covid-19 cases in marion county to stabilize and decrease to a less dangerous level," the release said.
some context: cases in indiana have been on the rise, with 630 new positive cases reported yesterday, according to data from the state.
the state had 837 covid-19 hospitalizations on july 28, compared to 626 a month ago.
indianapolis superintendent aleesia johnson said in a tweet wednesday the decision was incredibly difficult.
"i pray that our community takes seriously the responsibilities we all have in creating the health conditions that will allow for a (more) safe return to our school buildings.
we've got work to do, so let's do it," johnson said.
according to the release, all students in the indianapolis public schools district will receive either an ipad or chromebook for the new school year.
the district will also make hot spots available to families who don't have access to the internet.
##schools## gop sen.  john cornyn underscored the current difficulties to agree on a stimulus package when he summarized the closed-door lunch with top white house negotiators like this: "there's no consensus on anything.
just a lot of expression of views. "
as he left the lunch, sen.  john kennedy, a republican from louisiana, criticized what he thinks is excessive and nonessential spending in the gop's stimulus bill — and says there's a "lot of frustration" among republicans.
"there's a lot of — there's a lot of non-coronavirus spending on in this deal.
and i call it spending porn because the bill was supposed to be about coronavirus.
when i offer my ideas to the limited extent i was able.
i was told well we have to make a connection to coronavirus, and my idea is dead, i think, well that's a fair requirement.
and then i, you pick up the deal.
and you find all this extraneous stuff.
and it's not a newsflash that a lot of people are going to become frustrated.
and there was a lot of frustration.
now, some of my colleagues, don't want to talk about it.
but i'm going to talk about it.
if it upsets somebody, they need to talk, they need to call somebody who cares because i don't, i've got to represent my state. "
he didn't get into the details about what he considers "spending porn. "
##stimulus## the federal reserve left interest rates unchanged near zero in its monetary policy update wednesday, and it once again reiterated that the economic recovery will depend on the path of the virus.
"the ongoing public health crisis will weigh heavily on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term, and poses considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term," the central bank said in a statement.
even though the economy was beginning to rebound after grinding to a halt during the pandemic lockdown in the spring, the level of economic activity was still well below the levels from the start of the year, the fed said.
federal reserve chairman jerome powell will hold a press conference at 2:30 p. m.  et.
dr.  anthony fauci, the nation's top infectious disease expert, said on msnbc wednesday that adherence to five principles could help stop coronavirus surges happening in states.
the principles are: universal wearing of masks
avoiding crowds 
physical distancing of at least six feet
typical hand hygiene 
avoiding bars or closing them where possible looking back on the southern states that have already experienced resurgences, fauci said, there was an increase in the percent positive of tests being done, which is "surefire indication that you are in a process where you're heading towards a resurgence. "
he said that they were starting to see that in some states now, such as kentucky, tennessee, ohio and indiana.
fauci added that he and other members of the white house coronavirus task force made the point on the weekly call with governors that "it is very important to get ahead of the curve, because what we are seeing now it what actually took place a couple of weeks ago. "
"if we don't start initiating rather strict adherence to the five principles i just mentioned," fauci said, "what inevitably is going to happen is that the states that are not yet in trouble will likely get into trouble. "
"if you're not getting your arms around and suppressing that surge that's coming up, that's just a little bit below the radar screen, before you know it, two to three weeks down the pike, you're in trouble," he added.
rhode island gov.
gina raimondo said her state "cannot move forward to phase four" due to the spread of coronavirus from parties.
she said contacting tracing shows "we're partying too much, social gatherings are too large," during a weekly coronavirus briefing on wednesday.
raimondo announced rhode island will remain in phase three for another month, with a change; social gathering limits will be lowered from 25 to 15 people.
"we have cases traced back to a house party, with more than 50 people, and no one wearing a mask," she said.
the governor's listing of other gatherings with covid-19 cases included a baby shower, several a large birthday parties and pool parties.
"in each of these instances, the patterns are exactly the same, people who know each other, friends and family, more than 25 people, not wearing masks, in close contact for hours," raimondo said.
there have been up to seven to 10 cases found for each of the parties, in some cases, she said.
raimondo pleaded for residents "to knock it off, because people are getting sick people are dying, and it's unnecessary. "
the us could see coronavirus related deaths skyrocket "well into the multiple hundreds of thousands" if there is not a course correction, according to a warning from the association of american medical colleges.
"we're not on a good path at present," aamc chief scientific officer dr.  ross mckinney jr.  told cnn's brianna keilar.
mckinney also said that the crisis is putting a strain on hospitals, especially those in virus hotspots like arizona, florida and texas.
"the crisis is terrible for hospitals.
we're hearing, some of our hospitals in areas like southern florida, that in fact, they're full, but their staff is getting sick.
as their staff gets sick, there's nobody there to be able to fill in.
so, people are having to work extraordinarily long hours and as you get more tired you end up taking more risks, just because you make mistakes.
so we are really, pushing at the limits of what are health system can deliver.
.
.
we are really hitting at the limit and as disease hits the staff it's becoming even more of a crisis than it already was," he said.
the aamc is calling for an increase in critical supplies, as well as improving testing, reopening schools safely, expanding health insurance and developing a vaccination distribution protocol.
the association is urging the trump administration to invoke the defense production act to address supply shortages.
"essentially everywhere is short of the critical supplies and we as a country have not attempted, systematically, to upgrade our production of either ppe or of the supplies that are needed by the laboratories in order to meet the demands we have for testing.
the demands we have for ppe," mckinney said.
mckinney added, that the aamc is calling for national standards for local stay-at-home orders and reopening protocols.
each city or state "don't necessarily have to have the same degree of lockdown, but they should use the same criteria to try and move from one phase to the next, so that we can learn what are the best standards to use, so we don't get these continuous waves of infection," he said.
with reporting from cnn's jason hanna, madeline holcombe and shelby lin erdman watch the full interview here: ##hotspots## the us open championship will be held without fans at winged foot golf club in mamaroneck, new york, on sept.  14 to 20, gov.
andrew cuomo announced wednesday.
"it will be held without fans and the organizers are working with the state department of health to ensure everyone's safety," cuomo said.
the united states golf association (usga) will have protocols — like social distancing, the use of face coverings, cleaning and testing — in place to protect players and staff, a statement released by the governor's office outlined.
"we are very grateful to governor cuomo and his team for their collaboration over the past few months.
we are very proud to give our competitors and champions the opportunity to chase their dreams at the u. s.  open to winged foot golf club in september.
while we will miss having fans on-site, we know this is the right decision to make for the players and the community," usga ceo mike davis said in the governor's office statement.
dr.  anthony fauci, the director of the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases, said wednesday "we've got to follow the science" when asked about a viral video that promoted false coronavirus claims.
the video included false claims about masks and hydroxychloroquine.
versions of it were shared by president trump on twitter.
speaking during an interview on msnbc, fauci said that amid the spread of misinformation, it's important to "follow the science. "
"i'm very explicit and unambiguous when we say we've got to follow the science.
if a study that's a good study comes out and shows efficacy and safety for hydroxychloroquine or any other drug that we do — if you do it in the right way you accept the scientific data.
but right now today, the cumulative scientific data that has been put together and done over a number of different studies has shown no efficacy," fauci explained.
"when there's a video out there from a bunch of people spouting something that isn't true, the only recourse you have is to be very, very clear in presenting the scientific data that essentially contradicts that," fauci told msnbc's andrea mitchell.
alabama gov.
kay ivey encouraged school districts wednesday to phase back into in-class instruction.
"we don't have the luxury of not getting our young people in school," she said during a news conference.
students from second grade to college will now be required to wear masks or face coverings while in school under ivey's amended safer-at-home order.
alabama reported 1,345 additional covid-19 cases, bringing the statewide total to 81,687, according to dr.  scott harris, health officer with the state's department of public health.
approximately 22,000 of the total cases were confirmed in the last two weeks, harris said.
##schools## there are at least 848 new covid-19 cases in oklahoma, according to the latest numbers provided by the state's department of health.
this brings the state's total to 34,623 cases.
the state had reported more than 1,000 cases the past three days.
there are 14 new deaths in the state, bringing the total to 523.  however, the health department says that none of the new reported deaths occurred over the past 24 hours.
the health department also reported a total of 27,386 people have recovered from the virus while 663 people are currently hospitalized due to the virus.
note: these numbers were provided by the oklahoma state department of health and may not line up exactly in real time with cnn's database drawn from johns hopkins university and the covid tracking project.
new york gov.
andrew cuomo said the state conducted 62,276 tests tuesday with an infection rate of 1.
1%.
there are 619 new yorkers hospitalized, which is the lowest number since march 15, according to the governor.
cuomo said there were unfortunately five deaths tuesday from covid-19 but overall, "all the news on numbers and our status is all very good. "
"the whole goal now is to protect our progress and we are doing very well, and we want to make sure we continue to do well, even though the sea around us is roiled," the governor said during a press call wednesday.
the governor said they are focused and concerned about the national increase rate and the "inevitability that people get on planes and come here. "
on tuesday, the state liquor authority issued 29 violations on bars and restaurants that were not "following the law," cuomo said.
the 2020 us open golf championship will take place without fans at winged foot golf club in mamaroneck sept.  14 through sept.  20, according to the governor.
the governor said beginning today the department of motor vehicle will allow driving schools to begin conducting distance learning for pre-licensing courses.
vice president mike pence has arrived at raleigh-durham international airport in north carolina.
he is expected to visit a fourth grade class in apex at 12:50 p. m.  et and participate in a roundtable on reopening schools afterward.
later, he will participate in a roundtable discussion on vaccines at the nc biotechnology center.
after he deplaned air force two, pence greeted north carolina gop state chair michael wheatley with an elbow bump.
everyone wore a mask.
education secretary betsy devos is traveling with pence, as are commissioner of food and drugs dr.  stephen hahn and reps.  richard hudson, david rouzer and mark walker.
##schools## the national basketball association (nba) and players' union announced wednesday that none of the 344 players tested since july 20 tested positive for coronavirus.
the nba is set to restart the 2019-2020 season on thursday at the walt disney world resort near orlando, florida, with a tnt doubleheader: utah jazz vs.  new orleans pelicans and los angeles clippers vs.  los angeles lakers.
twenty-two of the league's 30 teams will take part in the season restart.
spain recorded 1,153 new coronavirus cases in the last 24 hours, the highest number since may 6, the spanish health ministry's data showed on wednesday.
the total number of covid-19 cases in spain has now reached 282,641.  the government started recording the number of cases in the country in 24-hour periods on may 6 instead of day by day.
wednesday's spike is the highest since the new counting method was put in place.
spain's covid-19 death toll rose by five in the last 24 hours and nine in the last seven days.
a total of 28,441 people have died from coronavirus in the country to date.
the director of the center for health emergencies, fernando simón, recently explained that the new cases were increasingly linked to younger people — which could account for lower death and hospitalization rates in the country.
house judiciary chair jerry nadler wished gop rep.  louie gohmert a "full and speedy recovery" in a tweet wednesday, going on to say he hopes the congressman's positive coronavirus test serves as a "lesson" for his colleagues.
nadler said he has regularly instructed all members of his committee, which gohmert serves on, to wear masks.
"when individuals refuse to take the necessary precautions it puts everyone at risk," nadler  said in his tweet.
during tuesday's hearing with attorney general bill barr, nadler urged a handful of republican members to keep their masks on.
the group did not include gohmert, but he also was not wearing a mask during the hearing.
gohmert was seen maskless outside the room near barr at one point.
the justice department told cnn wednesday that barr will get tested.
read nadler's tweet:  rep.  louie gohmert, a texas republican, has tested positive for coronavirus.
gohmert has frequently refused to wear a mask while at the capitol during the pandemic.
he has spent ample time on the house floor during votes speaking to aides and lawmakers — without a mask or social distancing.
his office did not respond to multiple requests for comment.
gohmert had been scheduled to fly aboard air force one with president trump to midland, texas, where he is fundraising and touring an oil rig.
he tested positive for coronavirus on wednesday morning during a pre-flight screening at the white house, a person familiar with the situation told cnn.
because of the positive test, gohmert is not traveling with the president.
a senior republican aide told cnn the test results have caused issues on the hill, with "a lot of staffers" ordered to get tests before they can go to meetings and resume activity.
some are sequestering in their offices until they can get tested.
gohmert's office notified republican leaders, who notified house medical staff and the protocol kicked in for further notification, the gop aide said.
politico first reported the news.
gohmert told cnn last month that he didn't wear a mask because he had been tested and he didn't yet have the virus.
"but if i get it, you'll never see me without a mask," he said.
he is just one of several conservative republicans who have pushed back on mask-wearing, sometimes causing tension during committee meetings.
during tuesday's hearing with attorney general bill barr, house judiciary committee chairman jerry nadler urged a handful of republican members to keep their masks on.
"i would remind mr.  jordan, mr.  biggs and mr.  johnson to stop violating the rules of the committee, to stop violating the safety of the members of the committee, to stop holding themselves out as not caring by refusing to wear their masks," nadler said, referring to reps.  jim jordan of ohio, andy biggs of arizona, and mike johnson of louisiana.
"is it permissible to drink a sip of coffee?"
johnson countered.
gohmert was also present at the hearing.
he was seen maskless outside the room near barr at one point.
the justice department told cnn wednesday that barr will get tested.
in another hearing wednesday, rep.  zoe lofgren interjected to remind members who are physically present that they are required to wear a mask.
"he was a member who was unwilling to consistently wear a mask," lofgren said of gohmert.
"it's a reminder that this is very serious and if you're unwilling to wear a mask that covers your nose and your mouth, please do leave the room and we'll arrange for you to participate remotely. "
watch: after president trump reiterated his demand today for money for a new fbi building, and criticized gop opposition to it, senate majority whip john thune, a republican from south dakota, told cnn's manu raju: "they'd have to make a better argument than what i've seen so far.
i don't think there's a lot of support from our members. "
trump told reporters as he left the white house earlier on wednesday that a new fbi building has been in the works "for many years," and that he thought the funding should stay in the stimulus bill.
pressed by cnn's kaitlan collins on the fact that republicans don't want it in the bill, trump said, "then republicans should go back to school and learn.
we need a new building. "
some background: senate majority leader mitch mcconnell made it clear on tuesday that he opposes including the funding for a new fbi building in any final negotiated product for the next coronavirus stimulus.
that's despite the fact that the senate gop stimulus proposal formally unveiled monday includes funds for a new fbi headquarters at the request of the trump administration.
the bill includes $1.
75 billion "for the design and construction of a washington, d. c.  headquarters facility for the federal bureau of investigation," according to the text.
pressed by a reporter on tuesday over the funding, mcconnell responded by saying that he's against "non-germane" provisions in the next stimulus.
the senate majority leader indicated that he hopes that anything not directly related to covid-19 will be stripped out before a new relief measure is enacted.
##stimulus## the school closures that swept several states in the united states between march and may due to the coronavirus pandemic were associated with a significant decline in covid-19 cases and deaths in those states at the time, according to a new study.
the states that closed schools earlier, when the cumulative incidence of covid-19 was lowest, saw the greatest declines per week at the time, compared with states that were slowest to close schools, and had the highest cumulative incidence of covid-19, according to the study, published in the medical journal jama on wednesday.
the researchers — from cincinnati children's hospital medical center, the university of cincinnati and the pediatric research in inpatient settings network in ohio — wrote in the study that "the analyses presented here suggest that the timing of school closure plays a role in the magnitude of changes associated with school closure. "
extrapolating their findings to the us population, the researchers wrote in the study that "school closure may have been associated with approximately 1.
37 million fewer cases of covid-19 over a 26-day period and 40,600 fewer deaths over a 16-day period; however, these figures do not account for uncertainty in the model assumptions and the resulting estimates. "
how the study worked: the study involved examining the cumulative incidence of covid-19 in each state per 100,000 people at the time of school closures.
those cumulative incidences for each state were separated into quartiles.
the researchers used models to estimate differences in covid-19 incidence and death between areas where schools closed and schools remained open.
the modeling suggests that closing schools when the cumulative incidence of covid-19 was in the lowest quartile compared with the highest quartile was associated with 128.
7 fewer covid-19 cases per 100,000 people within 26 days and 1.
5 fewer covid-19 deaths per 100,000 people over 16 days.
the study had some limitations: at the same time schools closed, other actions also were taken to reduce the spread of covid-19 — including closing nonessential businesses and increasing hand washing and the use of hand sanitizers.
more research is needed to determine the role some of those other interventions may have played in the reduction in covid-19 illnesses and deaths.
##schools## us citizenship and immigration services deputy director of policy joseph edlow kicked off his testimony wednesday before a house panel underscoring the agency's budget shortfall, which has resulted in nearly 70% of its workforce receiving furlough notices.
uscis, which is primarily fee-funded, notified congress of its projected budget shortfall in may.
the agency typically continues most operations during lapses in funding, such as last year's government shutdown.
but during the pandemic, the agency suspended its in-person services, including all interviews and naturalization ceremonies.
"these are difficult times for our nation and for uscis.
the pandemic has affected virtually all aspects of american life and has had a dramatic effect on uscis operations and revenue," edlow told lawmakers.
"despite our best efforts, we have been forced to issue furlough notices to nearly 70% of our employees without funding from congress, we will have no choice but to proceed with large-scale furloughs on aug.  30," he said.
the agency had originally planned to begin furloughs aug.  3.   the covid-19 relief bill released by the senate this week includes a $1.
2 billion loan from the treasury department for uscis.
##stimulus## new york city saw a slight uptick in the covid-19 infection rate across the city, mayor bill de blasio said.
the city's covid-19 infection rate is up to 2% which is a rise from the 1% previously reported earlier this week.
these are the city's latest reopening indicators:  at least 84 people were admitted to the hospital suspected to have covid-19 which is below the threshold to reopen.
·at least 290 people are in public hospital intensive care units being treated for covid-19.
note: the numbers listed were released by new york city mayor bill de blasio's office and may not line up exactly in real time with cnn's database drawn from johns hopkins university and the covid tracking project.
a failure to extend enhanced unemployment benefits in the next stimulus package could be devastating for millions of americans, and latina women  — and their families — could especially be hard-hit across the country.
according to the department of labor, more than 1.
8 million hispanic women are out of work in the us.
the unemployment rate for latinas now stands at a staggering 15%, partly due to the fact that many are more likely to work in leisure and hospitality services.
the weekly $600 federal unemployment enhancement expires in 48 hours, and divisions among republicans on the gop stimulus proposal continue.
cnn's leyla santiago spoke to some latina women about how they are coping:  ##stimulus## india's ministry of home affairs issued a fresh set of guidelines on wednesday as part of a third phase of easing restrictions in the country.
the easing comes as coronavirus cases in india crossed 1.
5 million cases ,with the country adding half a million cases in almost two weeks, according to the indian ministry of health and family welfare.
here are some of the guidelines:  starting saturday, restrictions on the movement of individuals at night will be lifted, according to a press release issued by the press information bureau.
starting aug.  5, yoga institutes and gyms will be allowed to open and must follow rules issued by the health ministry to ensure social distancing and other measures to contain the spread of covid-19.
schools, colleges and coaching institutions will remain shut until aug.  31.  
metro rail transport, cinema halls, swimming pools, entertainment parks, theaters, bars, auditoriums, assembly halls and other similar places will remain closed.
all functions, including cultural, religious and sports events, and other large congregations are still banned.
containment zones, areas identified as a hotspot by local authorities, will remain under lockdown with only essential activities allowed.
indian prime minister narendra modi announced a three-week nationwide lockdown on march 24.  since then, the lockdown has been extended several times with certain relaxations also announced.
##hotspots## senate majority leader mitch mcconnell argued wednesday that if stimulus negotiations fail, house speaker nancy pelosi and senate minority leader chuck schumer will be to blame, accusing them of potentially sabotaging negotiations to protect their own "political chances. "
"the only reason i can see that speaker pelosi and the democratic leader would sabotage negotiations is if, as some concluded when they killed police reform in june, they actually think bipartisan progress with the country would hurt their own political chances," the majority leader said in a floor speech this morning.
"if democratic leaders decide they won't negotiate, they will answer to the american people," mcconnell added.
"these are not the positions of people who are putting the common good above politics," mcconnell said.
adding, "the american people deserve better than this.
the american people cannot afford for democrats in congress to have decided in june that they're finished legislating until november.
not during a crisis like this.
the country needs help.
the country needs action. "
here's the latest on the stimulus talks: the negotiators responsible for brokering a sweeping stimulus deal that will keep many americans from losing federal unemployment benefits are currently at the "airing our differences" phase of talks.
there are divisions within the republican conference spilled out last night as some gop senators dismissed parts of their party's own leadership's stimulus plan.
in particular, senators blasted the administration for including $1.
75 billion in the bill to build a new fbi building.
meanwhile, democrats — who already passed their stimulus plan in the house — aren't budging on the $600 federal unemployment enhancement, nor the nearly $1 trillion for state and local funding.
the gop proposal would cut enhanced federal unemployment benefits to $200.
##stimulus## the state of florida reported 216 additional deaths on wednesday, according to data released by the florida department of health.
that breaks the previous record of 186 deaths — which was recorded just yesterday.
florida is reporting 9,446 new cases of covid-19.
this brings the state's total cases to at least 451,423, according to the state department of health.
the statewide resident death toll is now 6,333.
##hotspots## during an abc interview tuesday, dr.  robert redfield, the director of the us centers for disease control and prevention, admitted that there have been problems with the federal response to covid-19.
"yes, there's been mistakes," he said.
"and, yes, we fail.
we're in it doing the best we can and we're trying to make the best judgments we can. "
the cdc director discussed his initial response to news of something mysterious happening in central china.
he said he got a phone call on new year's eve last year alerting him to an incident involving a respiratory condition in wuhan and he told abc he knew it was serious.
he said he wrote the first situation report on the incident the very next day.
"we felt that this had potential to be a very serious situation that had national security implications," he said.
the cdc was ready to send in a team of scientists within a week, but the chinese government refused to let them in, redfield said, something he has said before and pointed to as a reason the us got a later start in identifying the dangerous virus and taking action.
he also said he's optimistic that the country can get the upper hand in the battle against the coronavirus.
"i wish now we would come together and recognize and see the possibility that we can beat this pandemic," he said.
europe's covid-19 threat: in that same interview, redfield admitted for the first time that the us was slow in recognizing the coronavirus threat from europe.
"the introduction from europe happened before we realized what was happening," redfield said.
"by the time we realized (the) europe threat and shut down travel to europe, there was probably already two or three weeks of 60,000 people coming back every day from europe," he added.
"that's where the large seeding came in the unites states. "
the us restricted travel from china on february 2 and from europe on march 13, but by march 8, covid-19 was already circulating among the community in new york city and, by march 15, community transmission of the virus was already widespread, a recent analysis from the cdc found.
by the time the trump administration banned travelers from europe, the virus was already spreading in new york city, according to the report.
testing was also limited at the start of the epidemic there, allowing people with undetected cases to spread the virus.
the north carolina state fair has been canceled this year due to coronavirus concerns, organizers for the fair announced on facebook on wednesday.
the 152nd state fair was originally scheduled to take place in october.
president trump signaled he may be interested in a short-term bill as negotiations on capitol hill have largely stalled.
"as of now we're very far apart," treasury secretary steve mnuchin told reporters on the south lawn.
"the president and we have discussed a short-term extension for unemployment benefits. "
trump said the negotiation team is working to extend the eviction moratorium.
"we want to work on the evictions, so people don't get evicted.
we work on the payments to the people.
and the rest of it we're so far apart, we don't care.
we really don't care.
we want to take care of the people.
the democrats aren't taking care of the people.
the payments aren't enough," trump said.
mnuchin said they are going to wait until friday regarding the possibility of a short-term bill, and that trump is focused on evictions and unemployment insurance.
"we want to take care of them now, the rest we can discuss later," trump added.
trump defends fbi building money: trump was asked about a $1.
75 billion provision in the bill for a new fbi building.
senate majority leader mitch mcconnell and other republicans have voiced opposition to the measure.
trump said that a new fbi building has been in the works "for many years," and he thought it was "crazy" that they would consider moving it to the suburbs of virginia or maryland.
"i'm very good at real estate, so i said we'll build a new fbi building, either a renovation of the existing or even better, we'll get a new building.
so we have that in the bill, it should stay," trump said.
pressed by cnn's kaitlan collins on the fact that republicans don't want it in the bill, trump said, "then republicans should go back to school and learn.
we need a new building. "
catch up on stimulus talks here.
watch:  ##stimulus## afl-cio president richard trumka decried the republican stimulus bill proposal, as benefits for millions of americans are set to expire friday.
"when this expires, 35 million people are going to have $600 a week less to spend.
can you imagine the shock that is going to go through our economy?"
trumka said.
the afl-cio is the largest federation of unions in the us, representing about 12.
5 million workers.
trumka said that he sees no evidence of unemployed americans taking advantage of the $600 benefit to not find jobs instead.
gop senators slammed the administration for including $1.
75 billion in the bill to build a new fbi building.
"the republican bill totally fails to recognize the magnitude of the crisis, and it directs money to people who don't need it and takes money away from people who do need it.
that $600 a week is what's keeping the economy going right now," trumka said in an interview with cnn's jim sciutto.
trumka also said that trump is pressuring workers to return to potentially unsafe conditions.
"what the republicans do in this bill is they don't give a standard.
that means essential workers are going to continue to get infected and continue to die.
.
.
.
it's the absolute wrong thing to do in a pandemic," he said.
trumka also alleged the occupational safety and health administration of being absent during the pandemic, saying that there have been 6,000 complaints but only two violations since february.
watch:  best buy is the latest major retailer to announce it will stay closed on thanksgiving.
instead, best buy will bolster its digital options and offer seasonal deals "earlier than ever," the company said late tuesday.
some context: that echoes plans from walmart, target and dick's sporting goods.
all have said within the past week that they too won't be open on thanksgiving and will begin holiday sales earlier in the year.
retailers are rethinking their plans for the holiday shopping season as coronavirus cases rise, prompting concerns over crowds in stores.
the negotiators responsible for brokering a sweeping stimulus deal that will keep many americans from losing federal unemployment benefits are currently at the "airing our differences" phase of talks.
but the weekly $600 federal unemployment enhancement expires in 48 hours, and, as a person involved told cnn last night, negotiators are "in different universes right now. "
here's where things stand this morning: republicans vs.  republicans: divisions within the republican conference spilled out last night as some gop senators dismissed parts of their party's own leadership's stimulus plan.
in particular, senators blasted the administration for including $1.
75 billion in the bill to build a new fbi building.
what the gop plan says about unemployment: the gop proposal would cut enhanced federal unemployment benefits to $200, from the current level of $600, as states transition to implement a system designed to provide approximately 70% wage replacement for laid off workers.
what democrats want: democrats — who already passed their stimulus plan in the house — aren't budging on the $600 federal unemployment enhancement, nor the nearly $1 trillion for state and local funding.
what happens next: contrary to where things currently sit, there are solutions here.
people involved in the talks — most of whom are veterans of a half-dozen or more extremely high stakes deadline negotiations — acknowledge there are deal points here that can be reached.
but they also make clear neither side is anywhere near moving towards those points at the moment.
today, treasury secretary steven mnuchin and white house chief of staff mark meadows will return to the capitol wednesday to meet again with house speaker nancy pelosi and senate democratic leader chuck schumer.
##stimulus## iraq's ministry of health reported at least 2,968 new coronavirus cases on wednesday.
this is a new record in daily cases.
the total number of cases in iraq now stands at 118,300.  the health ministry reported 68 covid-19 deaths, bringing the total number of deaths in iraq to 4,603.  as the us nears 150,000 coronavirus deaths, president trump is traveling to texas today, one of the country's virus hotspots.
according to the president's schedule, trump lands in texas at 11:30 a. m.  local time.
he is participating in a roundtable with supporters and delivering remarks at a fundraising committee luncheon in odessa, texas.
afterwards, trump will motorcade to midland, to participate in a tour of double eagle energy oil rig and deliver remarks on energy.
here is a look at where cases stand across the state, according to data from johns hopkins university.
texas currently has the fourth-highest number of covid-19 cases:  ##hotspots## the us is nearing the grim milestone of 150,000 coronavirus deaths as the country continues to battle surges of covid-19 cases.
according to johns hopkins university's latest tally, at least 149,260 people have died from covid-19 in the us.
the country leads the world in cases with more than 4.
3 million cases.
meanwhile, at least 22 us states are seeing increases in new covid-19 cases compared to the previous week.
##hotspots## peru reported its highest daily increase in new covid-19 cases with at least 5,288 in the last 24 hours, according to data released by the health ministry on tuesday evening.
the increase is the highest the country has recorded since june 12.   the total number of coronavirus cases in the country stands at 395,005, according to the same data, while the death toll reached 18,612 with 194 new deaths.
earlier on tuesday, president martin vizcarra announced an additional grant of 760 soles (more than $200) for 8,500 million vulnerable families affected by the pandemic.
during a televised speech celebrating peru's independence day at parliament, the president also announced a lifetime financial grant for children orphaned by covid-19 of 200 soles per month (about $57).
vizcarra also acknowledged the urgent need to reactivate the economy badly affected by the pandemic and announced a plan to create one million jobs "with an investment of 6,350 million soles (more than $1.
8 billion) to carry out infrastructure works and generate more than one million jobs throughout the country, which will start in august. "
vizcarra said .
some background: peru started to ease lockdown restrictions on july 1 and the state of emergency in the country is due to finish on july 31.
"lockdown has allowed us to avoid a catastrophe of unimaginable consequences" vizcarra said.
peru has the third highest number of covid-19 cases in the latin america, behind brazil and mexico, according to johns hopkins university.
##hotspots## in the last 7 days, memorial healthcare system hospitals in broward county have seen on average 37% of hospitalized covid-19 patients come from northwest miami-dade county, according to aurelio m.  fernández, iii, president and ceo of memorial healthcare system.
broward county is directly north of miami-dade, which has become the epicenter of florida's coronavirus pandemic.
"we are here to serve our communities, and we are making decisions on how to best manage our current volume, which includes the patients we are seeing from northwest miami-dade," fernández said.
fernández urged the community to wear masks, practice physical distancing and was their hands to help stop the spread of the virus.
##hotspots##   in florida, at least 54 hospitals have reached capacity in their intensive care units and show zero icu beds available, according to data released by the agency for health care administration (ahca).
ten of the hospitals at capacity are in miami-dade county, and eight of them are in broward county, ahca data shows.
another 44 hospitals have 10% or less icu capacity available, according to ahca.
ahca reports about 16% icu beds are available across the state of florida.
##hotspots## 25% of covid-19 patients in the care of florida's jackson health require icu treatment, according to jennifer piedra, the spokesperson for the miami-dade county hospital.
the state of florida has provided jackson health with 200 nurses, 50 respiratory therapists and 100 nursing support staff, says piedra.
jackson health has hired an additional 100 nurses.
jackson health is currently caring for seven pediatric covid-19 patients, per piedra.
since the inception of the pandemic, children under the age of 18 have been the smallest proportion of patients treated, says piedra.
piedra says jackson health is currently increasing icu capacity by converting beds and equipment and deploying staff.
"at jackson memorial hospital, we have multiple intensive care units located throughout our campus.
all of our patients in need of critical care – for covid or for other reasons – are receiving the appropriate level of care, regardless of the location of the unit they are in," piedra said.
##hotspots## with the coronavirus running rampant within american communities, health officials have made clear it's not yet time to ease up on precautions.
instead, governors and experts from coast to coast have urged americans to keep face masks in indoor public spaces, maintain their distance from others and avoid crowded spaces.
during a stop in kentucky over the weekend, white house coronavirus response coordinator dr.  deborah birx urged states who are seeing a concerning increase in cases to downsize their gatherings to less than 10 people, adding many of the young people who are spreading the virus are asymptomatic.
despite the grim numbers and stern warnings, some americans have chosen to return to pre-pandemic habits, ditching guidelines and attending parties.
a 700 party together in new jersey: in jackson, new jersey, it took police more than five hours sunday to break up a house party with about 700 guests.
the home was being rented out through airbnb, police said.
"come on folks!
come on," gov.
phil murphy, said during a news conference monday.
"that's needlessly putting men and women in uniform and their families at risk. "
his executive order limits indoor gatherings to 100 people and outdoor gatherings to 500.  health officials say they're worried the event will lead to more coronavirus cases.
new york governor "appalled" at hamptons concert: in new york, authorities are investigating a drive-in concert at the hamptons after footage appeared to show large groups of people not following social distancing guidelines.
the "safe & sound" benefit concert took place in southampton saturday, according to jack sterne, a spokesman for new york gov.
andrew cuomo.
it was headlined by the chainsmokers and an event page said it would allow about 600 vehicles.
read more here.
##hotspots##   muslims started their first pilgrimage ritual for hajj during the pandemic inside mecca's grand mosque on wednesday, with "safety bubbles" and social distancing procedures heavily enforced to further protect worshippers from the spread of the coronavirus, the saudi health ministry told cnn.
around 1,000 muslim worshippers started the tawaf al-qudum, or the tawaf of arrival, which is the initial ritual carried out upon entering mecca's grand mosque and circling islam's holiest shrine, the ka'aba, a statement by the saudi ministry of media said.
saudi arabia's health ministry is facing the task of ensuring that those chosen for this year's pilgrimage are coronavirus-free, and also enforcing social distancing measures inside the different rituals associated with the hajj, assistant deputy minister for preventative health at the saudi ministry of health, dr.  abdullah assiri told cnn in an interview on wednesday.
"there are some rituals of hajj that we cannot really separate [the pilgrims] because they have to be in one place at one time, so we had to prepare these places in a way that maintains social distancing and also to make available the personal protective equipment for these places," dr.  assiri said.
the muslim ritual, considered one of the five pillars of islam, has hosted more than two million people in recent years, but after the coronavirus outbreak, saudi authorities were forced to ban international visitors wishing to perform hajj this year.
the ministries started preparing for the scaled down hajj in february and after selecting 1,000 pilgrims — saudis and foreign residents in the kingdom, between the ages of 20-50.  they enforced a 14-day pre-hajj quarantine, tested them, provided trainings on social distancing and monitored, according to assiri.
"we are trying to apply the concept of safety bubbles, where every pilgrim will have an environment around him or her that are free and safe as much as possible from any kind of hazards, so all that is needed by the hajjis is their personal protective equipment their hygiene products are provided free of charge," he said.
germany currently has the capacity to carry out coronavirus tests on all travelers returning to the country from abroad, teresa nauber, a spokesperson for the health ministry, said wednesday.
"we currently have the capacity to conduct around 1.
2 million tests per week.
right now, only about half of that is actually being used, so i think that answers everything," she said.
germany's health minister, jens spahn, has said all travelers returning to germany from what the government deems to be "high-risk areas" will have to take mandatory pcr tests for the novel coronavirus starting next week.
according to the health ministry, the tests are to be offered free of charge to travelers and paid for by the federal government, with further plans in place to also offer free testing to travelers returning from non-high-risk countries, including member states of the european union.
the health ministry's spokesperson added that the government plans to have the regulation for free tests ready before the end of this week.
mandatory testing is set to begin in germany next week.
the move comes after germany's center for disease prevention, the robert-koch-institute, voiced grave concern about a rise in coronavirus infections in the country, which its scientists say are due in part to infected travelers returning to germany.
the united states must get control of the coronavirus pandemic or risk seeing deaths skyrocket "well into the multiple hundreds of thousands," the association of american medical colleges (aamc) warned as it released a new "roadmap" on how to contain and end the pandemic.
the blueprint by leaders of the nation's medical colleges, physicians, scientists, health care teams and frontline workers comes as the death toll from the virus in the us approaches 150,000.
"decisive, coordinated action is urgently needed to save lives, end the pandemic, restore america's economy, and return our lives to normalcy," dr.  david skorton, aamc president and ceo, said in a statement "it is critical that that the united states take a united approach to the pandemic," the organization, which represents the nation's medical colleges, teaching hospitals and health systems, wrote wednesday in releasing its plan for getting the pandemic under control.
their pandemic plan: the plan includes addressing critical supply shortages, expanding and improving testing, reopening schools safely, expanding health insurance and developing a vaccination distribution protocol.
here are some key recommendations:  the roadmap urges the trump administration invoke the defense production act or determine other means to solve the critical shortages in covid-19 testing supplies and personal protective equipment; and set targets for stockpiling supplies.
it also suggests ramping up covid-19 testing capacity to more than 2 million a day and reduce the turnaround time.
it calls for further face mask standards: "establish national standards on face coverings to stop the spread, especially by asymptomatic individuals, and make them mandatory in areas of growing community spread," the aamc recommended.
the document also calls for "establishing and enforcing national criteria for local stay-at-home orders and reopening protocols. "
other groups have released plans on how to end the pandemic over the past several months as national response efforts have faltered and states have employed a patchwork of approaches to try and mitigate the resurging virus.
more on the group: all 155 accredited medical school in the united states and 17 in canada, 400 teaching hospitals and health systems and 70 academic societies are part of the aamc.
russia claims that its own coronavirus vaccine is already undergoing the registration process, state-run news agency ria novosti reported wednesday.
in a government meeting chaired by president vladimir putin, deputy prime minister of russia tatyana golikova, who is overseeing the russian coronavirus response, said the country plans to start producing two vaccines in september and october.
remember: russia has released no scientific data on its vaccine testing and there are wide concerns that the human testing stage of the vaccine is incomplete.
cnn is unable to verify the vaccine's claimed safety or efficacy.
critics say moscow's push for a vaccine comes as political pressure rises from the kremlin, which is keen to portray russia as a global scientific force.
today, golikova said the country has "two most promising vaccines. "
"one of them developed jointly by the health ministry's gamaleya institute and the 48th research institute of the defense ministry," golikova said.
"this august we plan to register it on a condition meaning that after its registration there will be clinical trials on 1,600 people.
the mass production of the vaccine is planned for september 2020. "
"another vaccine developed by the vektor center of rospotrebandzor began joint clinical trials which are to wrap up in september and also in september it will undergo state registration to be produced starting october," golikova added.
read more here.
the us military has increased restrictions on its personnel in okinawa to stop the spread of covid-19, the top american military official in japan said in a virtual press conference wednesday.
lt.  gen.  kevin schneider, the commander of us forces japan (usfj), said local commanders at us installations in japan have been instructed to tighten movements of us personnel to ensure the virus does not spread.
there are 139 "active cases" of the virus among us military personnel, civilians and their families at us bases in the country, said schneider.
the commander has extended a public health emergency, which has been in place since april, through the middle of august, according to a joint statement by the japanese government and usfj.
in addition, all installations in okinawa have elevated their local health protection condition level to c+, which means significant additional restrictions are in place.
about the cases: okinawa prefectural government confirmed one new coronavirus case in kadena air base in okinawa today, bringing the total number of the infections among us military personnel in okinawa to 237 cases since july 1.   okinawa recorded its highest number of daily infections at 44 new cases among japanese today, including two people who work at the us bases.
the government said wednesday was the first time that workers at the u. s.  bases tested positive.
the novel coronavirus has infected more than 16.
7 million people worldwide and caused more than 660,000 deaths.
here's what you need to know.
who says pandemic is "one big wave": covid-19 is also unaffected by seasonal trends and does not behave like viruses such as flu, a who spokesperson said tuesday.
more than half mumbai slum residents may have been infected: that's according to a study released tuesday which raises questions over the level of testing in india.
the country has the third highest number of confirmed cases in the world after the united states and brazil.
vaccine may not be ready until mid-2021, german minister says: the country's minister for research anja karliczek issued the warning as she unveiled fresh funding for labs working on a vaccine.
european commission signs remdesivir deal: the commission signed a €63 million ($74 million) contract with pharmaceutical company gilead.
its purchase will help treat an estimated 30,000 patients presenting severe symptoms of coronavirus.
hong kong struggles with rising cases: the city recorded more than 100 cases for the eighth straight day in a row, as officials announced tighter restrictions in a bid to combat the spread of covid-19.
the french government has announced that it will extend its "partial unemployment" scheme for people working in the tourism sector.
the scheme supports those unable to work during the pandemic, with those enrolled receiving up to 84% of their after-tax salary from the state.
the program was due to end in september but will be extended to december for tourism workers, france's deputy minister for tourism, jean-baptiste lemoyne, said wednesday in an interview with france info.
"tourism professionals need long-term support; for some it will be a lost year," lemoyne said.
the scheme was first introduced during the lockdown in march to help companies cope with a decline in activity.
the french tourism sector has suffered greatly due to the pandemic's impact on travel.
france has also announced bailout packages for its embattled car industry and aviation industry.
a coronavirus vaccine may not be available until the middle of next year, germany's minister for research anja karliczek warned wednesday, as she announced further government funding to help accelerate the research and development process.
"researchers are working at an unbelievable speed, but of course setbacks are always possible," karliczek said.
"we can't expect miracles and most expect that vaccines for the vast majority of the population will only be available in the middle of next year, at the earliest," she added.
karliczek, speaking at a press briefing on wednesday, said the german government would offer financial support to three labs currently developing coronavirus vaccines.
the three labs – led by pharmaceutical companies biontech, curevac and idt biologica – will share a grant of €750 million from the german health ministry, she said.
officials hope the funding will help to accelerate both the research and development of the potential vaccines, while also increasing production capacity, karliczek added.
"the three vaccine candidates are all very promising, but there can always be setbacks in the trials," karliczek said.
there are currently 25 vaccine candidates in the clinical evaluation stage of development and a further 139 at the preclinical stage, according to the world health organization.
the european commission has signed a €63 million ($74 million) contract with pharmaceutical company gilead, to secure doses of antiviral drug remdesivir, the first medicine authorised by the eu for treating coronavirus.
"the commission has been working tirelessly with gilead to reach an agreement to ensure that stocks of the first treatment authorised against covid-19 are delivered to the eu," stella kyriakides, the european commissioner for health and food safety, said wednesday in a statement.
"a contract has been signed yesterday, less than a month after the authorisation of remdesivir, which will allow the delivery of treatments from early august for thousands of patients," she added.
the purchase was financed by the eu emergency support instrument, a new €2.
7 billion  fund ($3.
1 billion) which was created to help the bloc's member states recover from the covid-19 pandemic.
the purchase will help treat an estimated 30,000 patients presenting severe symptoms of coronavirus.
"the commission is now also preparing a joint procurement for further supplies of the medicine, expected to cover additional needs and supplies as from october onwards," the statement added.
remdesivir was originally studied as a potential treatment for ebola, before research revealed it could work against coronavirus.
iran has recorded 2,636 new coronavirus cases in the past 24 hours, bringing the total number of cases in the country to 298,909.   health ministry spokesman sima sadat lari said wednesday that among the cases,1,604 people have been hospitalized.
lari said there were 196 additional coronavirus-related deaths, bringing iran's total death toll to 16,343.   the country was badly hit by the virus earlier this year, with 23 members of its parliament testing positive.
iran's government temporarily released 54,000 prisoners in an effort to curb covid-19's spread and earlier this month president hassan rouhani ordered the mandatory wearing of face masks in public, after cases continued to rise.
more than half of residents living in mumbai's crowded slums may have contracted coronavirus and are likely being infected at a much higher rate than those not living in slum areas, a new study has found.
the study released tuesday raises questions over the level of testing in india, which has the third highest number of confirmed cases in the world after the united states and brazil.
on wednesday, india reported it had crossed 1.
5 million reported coronavirus cases after more than half a million infections were recorded in just 12 days.
it took nearly six months for india to reach its first 1 million confirmed cases.
mumbai, india's financial capital with a population of more than 12 million, has confirmed more than 110,000 cases, including at least 6,180 deaths, according to official statistics.
the city is in maharashtra, the worst-hit state in india with more than 377,000 confirmed cases and at least 14,000 deaths.
the study -- a collaboration between local authorities and medical institutions -- found that 57% of the samples collected from slum residents tested positive for coronavirus antibodies, while only 16% of those living outside of slums tested positive, according to a news release tuesday.
read more here.
##hotspots## the indian state of west bengal has extended its lockdown until august 31, its chief minister mamata banerjee said at a news conference on tuesday.
the lockdown will largely be a "general" one, meaning essential services will run and industrial activity will be allowed.
but in nine days in august, the east indian state will go into a "complete" lockdown, with everyone required to stay indoors.
west bengal has 60,830 cases of coronavirus including 1,411 deaths and 39,917 recoveries, according to the indian ministry of health and family welfare, as of wednesday.
"we need to break the chain.
.
.
if we can block the virus even to a certain extent we should take whatever steps we can," banerjee said.
"a lot of people think that the numbers are too high, but earlier we had one lab for tests, now we have 56," she said.
banerjee added that the state's health infrastructure had improved significantly in the last eight to nine years.
india has more than 1.
5 million coronavirus cases, the third highest tally in the world according to johns hopkins university.
##hotspots## hong kong continues to struggle with a fresh coronavirus outbreak, as officials reported 118 new coronavirus infections in the past 24 hours.
the data marks the eighth straight day of total cases surpassing the 100 mark, according to the head of communicable disease branch of the department of health, chuang shuk-kwan.
out of the fresh cases five are imported and 113 are locally transmitted.
among the local cases, 67 are related to previous patients and 46 are currently under investigation.
kwan added that out of the 67 related cases, 54 contracted the virus in social gatherings.
hong kong's coronavirus death toll rose to 24 as of wednesday morning, after an 85-year-old man died on tuesday and a 76-year-old woman died on wednesday.
the city has imposed its the strictest social distancing measures so far starting wednesday, in response to the fresh outbreak.
the new restrictions include tightening gatherings from up to four people to only two, expanding mandatory mask-wearing from all indoor public places to including outdoor public places, and a complete suspension of restaurant dine-ins.
##hotspots## covid-19 is spreading in "one big wave" and is not affected by seasonal trends, according to world health organization (who) spokesperson margaret harris.
coronavirus spikes recorded in european countries recently have typically been described as second waves.
but harris characterised the virus as "one big wave" that "is going to go up and down a bit," while addressing a virtual press briefing in geneva tuesday.
she also said covid-19 did not appear to follow the seasonal trends of viruses such as influenza.
"the season does not seem to be affecting the transmission of this virus currently.
what is affecting the transmission of this virus is mass gatherings, is people coming together and people not social distancing, not taking the precautions to ensure they're not in close contact," harris said.
"people are still thinking about seasons.
what we all need to get our heads around is this is a new virus and.
.
.
this one is behaving differently. "
the who spokesperson also warned against complacency, while speaking to irish radio station newstalk tuesday.
"people unfortunately interpreted the ending of lockdowns as the ending of outbreaks," she said, adding that the easing of lockdown was "the time when you really have to be most vigilant. "
"people relaxed and we're seeing these upticks," harris said.
coronavirus cases are rising in germany, france and spain, while spikes in hong kong and australia have also been recorded.
harris said the message to stay vigilant was a difficult one to deliver, especially to young people "in the middle of a lovely summer. "
"you're only young once.
it's easy for oldies like me to say stay at home.
you've also only got one life and you've also only got one family," she said.
"what we do see is that in the european region there has been a slight uptick in new cases in the past couple of weeks," who regional director for europe hans kluge, said during an interview with bbc radio 4 wednesday.
"whether this is a first wave or a second wave -- what we do know is that it's a consequence of change in human behavior. "
the official also noted that the who had received reports "from civil and health authorities of a higher proportion of new infections among young people. "
kluge said he was "cautiously optimistic" about the virus but warned that the pandemic was "not going to fade away anytime soon. "
there is no "silver bullet" on testing to allow british citizens to travel without potentially having to quarantine on return, uk culture minister oliver dowden said wednesday.
"there is not a silver bullet of testing immediately at the border.
of course, we are looking at reviewing other measures that we could take to address this but, at this stage, it's not the case that we can simply test at the border and give people that assurance," dowden told the bbc.
"we want to keep our economy open, we want to keep the disease under control -- we have to take these measures," he added.
dowden's remarks come days after the uk government announced that it would remove spain from its list of countries that residents can safely visit, sparking criticism from both the spanish government and british travelers.
"we have to act in a way to keep the virus under control in this country.
it was rising in spain, and we had to ensure that we didn't import cases," dowden said.
"if there are ways in which we can ease the burdens, we will do that, but at the moment the safest thing to do is for people to quarantine for 14 days if they are returning from spain," he added.
##reopening## nearly 16.
8 million cases of the novel coronavirus have been recorded worldwide, including more than 660,000 deaths, according to johns hopkins university.
here's the latest updates on the covid-19 pandemic from around the globe: india cases surge: the total number of coronavirus cases in india has surpassed 1.
5 million, after more than half a million new infections were recorded in just 12 days.
only the united states and brazil have reported more cases than india.
rising us death toll: more than 1,200 virus-related deaths were recorded in the united states on tuesday.
nearly 150,000 people have died of covid-19 in the us, according to johns hopkins university.
uk vaccine deal: britain has signed an agreement to secure up to 60 million doses of a potential coronavirus vaccine currently being developed by pharmaceutical giants sanofi and glaxosmithkline.
the uk has now signed deals to secure access to four potential vaccines being developed, totaling 250 million doses.
japan sees highest daily spike: some 981 new cases were recorded on tuesday, eclipsing the previous high of 966 set on july 23.  
china records over 100 new cases: fresh outbreaks in china's far western region of xinjiang and northeastern province of liaoning have continued to spread.
the country recorded 101 new infections for tuesday, its highest daily increase since april 12.  this post was updated to reflect the us death count.
south korea is imposing tighter controls on russian crew members intending to dock in its ports from august 3, according to the country's ministry of health and welfare.
starting from the beginning of august, russian crew members will have to submit coronavirus test results to korean authorities 48 hours before departing for south korea.
in july, 44 crew members of a russian vessel tested positive in south korea's southeastern port of busan.
an additional 10 local infections were linked to the cluster, according to the korea centers for disease control and prevention.
south korea detected 48 new coronavirus cases on tuesday, including 14 local infections, increasing the total to 14,251, according to the health ministry.
the death toll remained at 300.   a total of 882 people are in active quarantine, while 13,069 have recovered so far.
##hotspots## the british government has signed a supply deal to secure up to 60 million doses of a potential coronavirus vaccine currently being developed by pharmaceutical giants sanofi and glaxosmithkline.
"a deal to secure early access to a promising new coronavirus vaccine has been announced by the government today (29 july), enhancing the uk's growing portfolio of vaccine candidates to protect the public and to save lives," the department for business, energy and industrial strategy (beis) said wednesday in a statement.
"the agreement with gsk and sanofi pasteur, which combined have the largest vaccine manufacturing capability in the world, will supply the uk with 60 million doses of their covid-19 vaccine, which is based on existing dna-based technology used to produce sanofi's flu vaccine," the statement added.
according to the government, this latest deal could allow priority groups to be vaccinated as early as summer 2021, should the sanofi and gsk vaccine candidate prove effective in human studies.
"our scientists and researchers are racing to find a safe and effective vaccine at a speed and scale never seen before.
while this progress is truly remarkable, the fact remains that there are no guarantees," business secretary alok sharma said wednesday.
"in the meantime, it is important that we secure early access to a diverse range of promising vaccine candidates, like gsk and sanofi, to increase our chances of finding one that works so we can protect the public and save lives," he added.
diversified access: the uk government has now signed deals to secure access to four potential vaccines being developed, totaling 250 million doses.
"through this agreement with gsk and sanofi, the vaccine taskforce can add another type of vaccine to the three different types of vaccine we have already secured," the chair of the government's vaccines task force, kate bingham, said.
"this diversity of vaccine types is important because we do not yet know which, if any, of the different types of vaccine will prove to generate a safe and protective response to covid-19," she added, cautioning that the uk must not be complacent or overly optimistic.
##vaccines## us president donald trump's return as the face of the covid-19 response has deteriorated into a misinformation masterclass that explains why america is in such a mess.
in an extraordinary performance tuesday, as the daily death toll again soared toward 1,000 and the number of americans dead approached a tragic milestone of 150,000, trump again forswore the most basic requirements of national leadership in a crisis.
at a white house briefing that turned almost into a parody of his own mismanagement of the pandemic, he complained that the government's top infectious diseases expert, dr.  anthony fauci, had better approval ratings than he did.
he painted a misleading picture of a viral surge still raging across southern and western states that is showing new signs of spreading deeper into the heartland, saying large portions of the country were "corona-free. "
and he launched a stunning new pitch for hydroxychloroquine, the anti-malaria drug beloved by conservative media but that has not been shown in rigorous clinical trials to be an effective treatment for covid-19.
given the trail of sickness and death that has unfolded in recent months, it was bizarre though not surprising that the president would return to the controversy over hydroxychloroquine.
on monday night, he retweeted videos describing hydroxychloroquine as a "cure" that meant americans didn't need to wear masks.
read the full analysis: ##politics## a study done in monkeys suggests moderna's experimental coronavirus vaccine might protect against severe disease and reduce the risk of passing the virus along to others.
moderna started advanced, phase 3 testing of its experimental vaccine in humans in the united states on monday -- the fastest advancement ever of a new vaccine in the us.
but the quick vaccine development process means the vaccine was not tested extensively in animals before moving on to people.
a team at the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases, which helped develop the vaccine, tested it in rhesus macaque monkeys.
then they infected the monkeys with the virus -- an experiment that would be difficult, ethically, to do in human.
monkey tests: while the monkeys did become infected, the vaccine appeared to interfere with the spread of the virus in the animals, the niaid team reported in the new england journal of medicine.
"remarkably, after two days, no replicating virus was detectable in the lungs of seven out of eight of the macaques in both vaccinated groups, while all eight placebo-injected animals continued to have replicating virus in the lung," the niaid researchers said in a statement.
none of the monkeys that got the higher dose of vaccine had virus in their noses, either.
that would suggest the vaccine might prevent the spread of the virus, even if people do get infected.
"this is the first time an experimental covid-19 vaccine tested in nonhuman primates has been shown to produce such rapid viral control in the upper airway, the investigators note," the researchers said.
"a covid-19 vaccine that reduces viral replication in the lungs would limit disease in the individual, while reducing shedding in the upper airway would potentially lessen transmission of sars-cov-2 and consequently reduce the spread of disease," they added.
the researchers note that it's not at all clear that monkeys respond to the virus in the same way that people do.
but they noted that the virus appears to replicate in the noses of the monkeys in much the same way as it does in people.
also reassuring: one worry was that the vaccine might make the body overreact to a true infection later on, a response known as vaccine-associated enhanced respiratory disease.
this didn't happen in the monkeys, the researchers said.
##vaccines## india's total number of coronavirus cases surged past 1.
5 million on wednesday, according to the indian ministry of health and family welfare.
india hit a million cases of coronavirus on july 17, six months after its first infection was discovered on january 30.  since then, it took just 12 days to record another half a million cases.
as of wednesday, india has reported a total of 1,531,669 cases -- the third highest in the world, after the united states and brazil.
the total includes 34,193 deaths.
the country had conducted 17,743,740 coronavirus tests as of july 28.  it currently has 509,447 active covid-19 cases.
recovered patients: some 988,029 people have recovered from the virus, according to the indian ministry of health and family welfare.
in india, patients with mild and moderate symptoms are considered no longer active after 10 days of symptom onset if they meet certain conditions.
a test to confirm that they no longer have the virus is not required.
severe cases can only be discharged after one negative coronavirus test.
##hotspots## at least 61,660 new coronavirus infections and 1,244 virus-related deaths were confirmed in the united states on tuesday, according to johns hopkins university data.
the us' cumulative case count now stands at 4,351,997, including 149,256 fatalities, according to jhu.
the totals include cases from all 50 states, the district of columbia and other us territories, as well as repatriated cases.
cnn is tracking us coronavirus cases here: ##hotspots## japan's ministry of health recorded 981 new covid-19 cases on tuesday -- the highest daily increase in the country since the pandemic began.
previously, the country's highest daily spike was 966 cases, recorded on july 23.  the total number of infections reported in japan now stands at 32,613, with 1,014 deaths.
osaka and aichi prefectures recorded their own highest daily infections on tuesday.
osaka recorded 155 cases while aichi confirmed 110 infections.
cnn is tracking worldwide coronavirus cases here: ##hotspots## the united states was slow in recognizing the coronavirus threat from europe, dr.  robert redfield, the director of the us centers for disease control and prevention, admitted for the first time tuesday in an interview with abc news.
"the introduction from europe happened before we realized what was happening," redfield said.
"by the time we realized (the) europe threat and shut down travel to europe, there was probably already two or three weeks of 60,000 people coming back every day from europe," he added.
"that's where the large seeding came in the unites states. "
the us restricted travel from china on february 2 and from europe on march 13, but by march 8, covid-19 was already circulating among the community in new york city and, by march 15, community transmission of the virus was already widespread, a recent analysis from the cdc found.
by the time the trump administration banned travelers from europe, the virus was already spreading in new york city, according to the report.
testing was also limited at the start of the epidemic there, allowing people with undetected cases to spread the virus.
read the full story:  vietnam has confirmed eight new covid-19 infections in the resort city of da nang, according to chinhphu, the official government newspaper.
the new cases bring the total number of confirmed cases in vietnam to 446, while the death toll remains at zero.
da nang has recorded 29 new infections over the past five days.
over 16,000 people who are either close contacts of confirmed cases in da nang or have entered "pandemic hit areas" have been placed under medical surveillance.
among them, 12,996 people have been placed in centralized quarantine camps, chinhphu reported.
on monday, 80,000 tourists were ordered to leave da nang, after a new outbreak hit the city following around 100 days of no local transmissions.
##hotspots## the australian state of victoria recorded 295 new covid-19 cases on tuesday, state premier daniel andrews said on wednesday.
victoria also recorded nine new coronavirus deaths, bringing the statewide death toll to 92.  the 295 new cases bring the total number of confirmed cases in the state to 9,304.
"if you are sick, you must get tested," said premier andrews, who also urged people who are showing symptoms to stay home and get tested.
he added that "this is largely a second wave fueled by outbreaks in workplaces. "
andrews also announced that 18,077 people were tested on tuesday, bringing the total number of tests conducted in victoria to 1,554,705.  victoria police said they fined 103 individuals who breached the chief health officer's directions over the past 24 hours, including three people fined for gathering to celebrate a birthday.
victoria's new numbers come as the state of queensland announced it would close its borders to greater sydney starting on saturday in order to curb the spread of the virus.
new south wales, the state sydney is located in, reported 19 new coronavirus cases on wednesday.
##hotspots## china recorded 101 new coronavirus cases on tuesday, the highest single-day increase since early april, according to numbers released by the national health commission on wednesday.
among the new cases, 98 were locally transmitted, including 89 in the far western region of xinjiang where a fresh outbreak has emerged this month.
one local infection was also found in beijing, and the remaining local cases were found in liaoning.
on tuesday, china also recorded a further 27 asymptomatic infections, which are not included in the tally of confirmed cases.
this is the first time china has reported more than 100 new infections in a single day since april 12, when the country reported 108 new cases -- most of which were imported.
it is the third consecutive day china has reported the highest daily spike in local infections since early march.
##hotspots## mexico surpassed 400,000 coronavirus cases tuesday after its health ministry recorded 7,208 new cases.
the country has now reported a total of 402,697 confirmed cases of covid-19.
the ministry also added 854 new fatalities from coronavirus tuesday, bringing mexico's death toll to 44,876.
##hotspots## white house coronavirus task force coordinator dr.  deborah birx on tuesday provided some dire warnings for states that are in the task force-defined "yellow zone" for cases and test positivity, which she said are different from outbreaks across the country earlier this year.
on a call tuesday with vice president mike pence and several governors, she said there has been "significant improvement" in "red zone" states florida, california, texas, and arizona following orders to close bars, decrease indoor dining, and require the use of masks.
the task force defines its "red zone" states as more than 100 cases per 100,000 people and more than 10% test positivity.
but she said there are still rising cases and test positivity in other "red zone" states: mississippi, indiana, tennessee, virginia, oklahoma, georgia, idaho, and arkansas.
birx said "yellow zone" states, which the task force defines as having between 10 and 100 cases per 100,000 and 5-10% test positivity, have had a similar profile to "red zone" states: "starting with the 20 to 30 year-olds presenting as a first wave. "
"remember, the majority of those are asymptomatic so if you expect to see hospitalizations, by the time you see hospitalization, your community spread is so widespread that you've flipped into a red state incredibly quickly," birx said.
she said the task force is working with governors and mayors in the following places: colorado, the district of columbia, indiana, iowa, kansas, kentucky, minneapolis, missouri, north carolina, nebraska, ohio, utah, washington and wisconsin.
the task force, birx said, is talking with these places "about increasing mitigation efforts now because if we wait until increased hospitalizations it is really way too late.
because what we are experiencing now is really different than march and april, it's very different from the outbreaks of may that was typically contained.
this widespread community spread in the younger age group both rural and very urban and urban areas so by the time you see it up to 80-90% of your counties already have more than 10%. "
birx expressed concern for major metros like chicago and philadelphia, as well as california's central valley, and applauded alabama gov.
kay ivey's mask mandate, which she said is having a "significant impact. "
pence reiterated that the administration does not want another closure -- something, he said, "we don't ever want to see again," but pointed to studies that show that the use of masks, bar closures, limiting outdoor dining, and limiting social gatherings are having similar effect as sheltering in place earlier this year.
he recommended governors in "yellow zone" states "take a hard look" at those four measures "whether it be on a county-by-county basis or a statewide basis. "
"we'll support your decision, but i think your big message to these states that may be emerging is don't wait," pence said.
##hotspots## us president donald trump defended his tweets in support of hydroxychloroquine saying that the drug is still "very positive" and called a doctor who was spreading conspiracy theories on covid-19 in a now deleted video "very impressive. "
when discussing the video that he retweeted monday night featuring a group of doctors making false claims related to coronavirus, trump said the thought were "very respected doctors. "
"there was a woman who was spectacular in her statements about it and she's had tremendous success with it.
and they took her voice off -- i don't know why they took her off but they took her off.
maybe they had a good reason, maybe they didn't," he said.
the video, published by the right-wing media outlet breitbart news, featured a group of people wearing white lab coats calling themselves "america's frontline doctors" staging a news conference in which one speaker who identifies herself as a doctor makes a number of dubious claims, including that "you don't need masks" to prevent the spread of coronavirus, and that recent studies showing hydroxychloroquine is ineffective for the treatment of covid-19 are "fake science" sponsored by "fake pharma companies. "
when challenged on these claims by cnn's kaitlan collins, trump demurred saying, "she was on air along with many other doctors.
they were big fans of hydroxychloroquine and i thought she was very impressive in the sense that .
.
.
she said she has tremendous success with hundreds of different patients and i thought her voice was an important voice but i know nothing about her. "
trump shared multiple versions of the video -- which was deleted by twitter, facebook and youtube -- with his 84 million twitter followers monday night despite the claims running counter to his own administration's health experts.
when pressed by collins on this fact, trump abruptly ended the news conference.
but trump once again stuck by his defense of hydroxychloroquine, telling reporters about his tweet: "i wasn't making claims.
it's recommendations of many other people including doctors. "
"i think it's become very political.
i happen to believe in it.
i would take it -- as you know i took it for a 14-day period.
i'm here -- i happen to think it works in the early stages.
i know frontline medical people believe that too, some, many. "
"it's safe, it doesn't cause problems.
i had no problem," trump said adding, "it didn't get me and it's not going to hopefully hurt anybody," trump added.
a study found that neither hydroxychloroquine alone nor hydroxychloroquine plus azithromycin appeared to affect the condition of patients at the 15-day mark.
additionally, unusual heart rhythms and elevated liver-enzyme levels were more frequent in patients receiving hydroxychloroquine alone or with azithromycin, according to the study.
us president donald trump says his relationship with dr.  anthony fauci is "very good" but wonders why the doctor's approval rating is so high when his is so low.
speaking a day after he retweeted a message claiming fauci had misled the public, trump chalked up his own sinking numbers to his personality.
but he said fauci's broad respect should transfer to the trump administration -- for whom fauci works.
"i get along with him very well and i agree with a lot of what he's said," trump insisted.
"it's interesting: he's got a very good approval rating.
and i like that, it's good," the president went on.
"because remember: he's working for this administration.
he's working with us.
we could have gotten other people.
we could have gotten somebody else.
it didn't have to be dr.  fauci.
he's working with our administration.
and for the most part we've done what he and others -- and dr.  [deborah] birx and others -- have recommended. "
trump continued: "and he's got this high approval rating.
so why don't i have a high approval rating with respect -- and the administration -- with respect to the virus?
we should have it very high. "
"so it sort of is curious," trump said, "a man works for us, with us, very closely, dr.  fauci and dr.  birx also, very highly thought of -- and yet, they're highly thought of, but nobody likes me?"
"it can only be my personality, that's all," he concluded.
##politics##
a surge in coronavirus cases, which hit europe for the first time in early spring, is back — but this time around, governments are imposing local restrictions and keeping their economies open, zamira rahim, pierre bairin and gaëlle fournier report.
many politicians feel that locking down society once again is too high a price to pay.
but health and economic experts cnn spoke to disagree, saying in the long run, a short "circuit-breaker" lockdown, as recommended by the scientists advising the uk government, is better than the so-called "whack-a-mole" strategy of containing subsequent waves of the outbreak.
let's look at the situation in the uk: as a result of its spring lockdown, the british economy shrank by 20% in the second quarter, pushing it into the deepest recession of any major developed economy.
which is why prime minister boris johnson is now under pressure from some members of his cabinet to keep the economy open, even as the country recorded 17,234 new cases on tuesday and 143 deaths.
johnson's fix, of a patchwork of local lockdowns and restrictions, will have little impact on the virus and hurt the economy more over time, say experts, especially when key systems used to control the epidemic -- like contact tracing and testing -- remain plagued with problems.
the key, says robert west, professor of health psychology at university college london, is to scale up those systems while in a lockdown.
the same tussle is happening in france, where president emmanuel macron said in august that he would not shutter the whole country again.
on wednesday, soaring rates forced him to announce a curfew on paris and other cities.
experts say a second lockdown not only feels inevitable, but makes economic sense.
"we need to stop thinking that there is an opposition between economy and public health," catherine hill, a prominent french epidemiologist, told cnn.
"if we solve the coronavirus crisis, then we solve the economic crisis.
in china, they controlled the epidemic and the economy returned.
the aim is simple: to get rid of the virus, so that life gets back on track. "
you asked.
we answered q.  how do we celebrate halloween safely?
a: instead of halloween parties or trick-or-treating, the cdc suggests carving pumpkins with your family or with friends and neighbors (at a safe distance).
you can also have virtual costume contests or a halloween scavenger hunt, "where children are given lists of halloween-themed things to look for while they walk outdoors from house to house admiring halloween decorations at a distance," the cdc said.
​ send your questions here.
are you a health care worker fighting covid-19?
message us on whatsapp about the challenges you're facing: +1 347-322-0415.   what's important today melania trump details covid illness and reveals son barron contracted it the us first lady posted a personal essay on the white house website detailing her experience battling covid-19, for which she tested positive approximately two weeks ago.
melania trump also revealed that her son, barron trump, 14, eventually tested positive for the virus, a diagnosis the white house did not share.
she has now tested negative for the virus, as has her husband, president donald trump, according to his doctors.
"naturally, my mind went immediately to our son," she wrote, adding barron had "no symptoms," and has now tested negative.
at a campaign rally in iowa on wednesday, trump used his son's experience of the virus and his own rebound -- helped along by a cocktail of expensive therapies not available to the public --  to downplay the virus.
"i don't even think he knew he had it, because they're young and their immune systems are strong and they fight it off.
99.
9%.
and barron is beautiful and he's free," he said.
'safe and effective' covid-19 vaccine may be widely available by april 2021, fauci says a covid-19 vaccine may be widely available by april 2021, the us's top infectious diseases expert said in an interview with cbs news wednesday.
dr.  anthony fauci said researchers should know by "november or december" whether some vaccine trials have a safe candidate.
and even in the event that a safe candidate is determined, initial quantities will likely only be a few million doses.
he also called on americans to "bite the bullet and sacrifice that social gathering" over thanksgiving.
"it is unfortunate, because that's such a sacred part of the american tradition, the family gathering around thanksgiving, but that is a risk," fauci said, adding that given the current spread of covid-19 and the uptick in infections, people need to be very careful about social gatherings, especially older people and those with underlying conditions.
herd immunity is not the way out of the coronavirus pandemic, experts say herd immunity has once again emerged as a controversial topic.
during a call with reporters on monday, white house senior administration officials discussed a contentious declaration written by some scientists that advocates for ending lockdowns, building immunity and pushing for those who are not vulnerable to covid-19 to resume normal life.
the great barrington declaration aligns "very strongly with what the president has said for months -- that is strongly protect the high-risk elderly and vulnerable and open schools and restore society to function," a senior administration official said during the call.
but to allow the virus to circulate freely is "a dangerous fallacy unsupported by scientific evidence" that risks "significant morbidity and mortality across the whole population," 80 scientists from around the world wrote in an open letter.
world health organization director-general tedros adhanom ghebreyesus called it "unethical" during a briefing on monday.
others have warned of catastrophic consequences: dr.  leana wen, emergency physician and cnn medical analyst, back in august estimated 2 million americans could die.
on our radar a massive animal migration is still happening in the maasai mara.
but the pandemic means few can see it berlin tourism ad flips the bird to mask refuseniks arizona family lost their business -- and eight family members -- to covid-19 what the reaction to chinese president xi jinping coughing during a speech says about east asia right now people with blood type o may have lower risk of covid-19 infection and severe illness, two new studies suggest hong kong and singapore to set up a 'travel bubble' as covid cases fall covid-19 is killing restaurants.
so why is michelin still obsessing about star ratings?
today's top tip today is global handwashing day and observing it has never been more important than during a pandemic, which could be stemmed, in part, by everyone taking hand hygiene seriously.
here are some tips on how to motivate yourself to keep your hands clean.
build your knowledge of the coronavirus and the risks.
tape to your entrance hall and bathroom wall or mirror pieces of paper that say, "don't forget to wash hands. "
further internalize the habit and motivation by creating a routine and considering yourself a role model for others.
today's podcast "if there were 200,000 15-year-olds dying, i think we would have had a very different approach to the pandemic. "
-- azim shariff, associate professor in the department of psychology at the university of british columbia.
around the world, more than 1 million people have now died from the coronavirus.
rationally, we know this is devastating, but emotionally, why can we feel so removed from it?
cnn's chief medical correspondent dr.  sanjay gupta talks to shariff about the limits of human empathy in today's episode.
listen now.
in the foothills leading to dasyueshan national park in eastern taiwan, mei-hsiu hwang points to the pear, tea and betel nut plantations patchworking the slopes.
"all this used to be bear habitat," she says.
in particular, the formosan black bear, a large omnivore native to the high, clouded mountains that run down the spine of taiwan.
hwang, associate professor and director of the institute of wildlife conservation at taiwan's national pingtung university of science and technology, is likely the world's foremost expert on this species.
but when she first started to study the huge mammals as part of her phd in 1996, she says her friends and acquaintances reacted with shock.
"they'd say, 'do we have bears in taiwan?
we never had bears.
do we still have bears?'"
she recalls.
more than two decades later, the black bear is rapidly becoming a symbol for taiwan.
the mascot of taipei city is a black bear named "bravo," who was present at celebrations on may 24, when taiwan held asia's first same-sex weddings.
meanwhile, the island's now-defunct v air airline took its name from the distinctive white v shape on the black bear's chest.
but despite an increased profile, these animals are still in deep trouble, says hwang.
classified as "endangered" by the taiwan government, the species is being pushed to the brink of extinction by illegal hunting and land clearing.
worse still, the relative rarity of these bears, combined with their dislike of humans, makes it almost impossible to know how many are left.
hwang estimates there are between just 200 and 600 black bears over the entire island.
"if we cannot protect them, i don't believe we can protect anything else," says hwang.
"bears are a flagship species, they're big, like a star, like pandas, elephants and tigers.
if a country cannot protect them, will you be able to protect other, smaller wildlife?
i don't think so. "
forced into the mountains hwang has to travel hours up into the hills, far from taiwan's towns and cities, to access the areas still inhabited by bears.
there are no official statistics from 100 years ago, before taiwan's human population rapidly expanded, but hwang says there are a large number of indigenous taiwanese traditions relating to the bears that go back centuries.
even during japanese occupation of the island in the early 20th century there were reports of bears being found as low as 100 meters above sea level.
now, hwang says, they almost entirely live above 1,000 meters.
"at lower elevations, theoretically it would be good habitat, but (they're driven higher) because of all the human disturbances -- mining, recreation, a lot of people activity," she says.
the bears are primarily omnivorous, with their diet consisting mainly of fruits, nuts and berries.
they scrounge over a massive habitat measuring hundreds of square kilometers.
unlike other large bears, they don't hibernate.
the formosan black bear is a subspecies of the asian black bear, which can be found across east and southeast asia, including in japan, thailand and south korea.
the entire species is marked as "vulnerable" by the international union for conservation of nature, but hwang says it hasn't attracted as much attention as other more eye-catching animals, such as pandas or asian elephants.
in fact, the lack of interest to protect the bears that she faced when she started working with them made her furious.
"it is a shame for taiwanese people," says hwang.
"i feel ashamed, how come they're endangered and they're still treated this way. "
hunted for meat and medicine while habitat loss has been hard on the bears, the biggest threat to taiwan's largest mammal is illegal hunting.
over recent decades, there's been a growing, lucrative trade in bear parts -- bear meat for the black market and bones, gallbladders and paws for traditional chinese medicine.
in the past there were strict taboos among indigenous taiwanese about hunting bears.
if you killed one, hwang says, some tribes even isolated you out of fear you would bring bad luck back to the village.
but now, a black bear corpse can be worth as much as $5,000 to a hunter.
studies around yushan national park prior to the 1980s found 22% of the area's bears were killed for their meat and body parts.
by the 1990s, this had soared to 59%.
hwang says the solution lies in education.
if the market for bear parts and meat can be ended by raising consumer awareness, the animals can be saved.
"if there is no market demand, i believe this will lead to less bear killing.
this surely will help," she says.
another problem is that, due to bears' large feeding grounds, they regularly stray outside of the protected forests and into the wilds where they are vulnerable.
displaying the gps data of one adult male on her laptop, hwang shows us his path over the course of months.
"that's the protected forest," she says, pointing to a small square covering just a fraction of his path.
still, hwang says there doesn't need to be more protected areas across the island, just better enforcement against illegal hunting.
"if all the suitable habitat allowed bears to survive, the current capacity for the whole island is able to have 5,000 to 10,000 individuals," she says.
instead, there are just hundreds.
'more precious than pandas' the only place anyone is likely to see a black bear these days is behind wire and glass at the taipei zoo.
on a sunny saturday, tourists from the island and mainland china cluster around the window of the formosan black bear enclosure.
"he's coming.
he's so cute," one tourist says in mandarin as the huge shaggy bear ambles through its cage.
tsai chien-chuan, 40-year-old father of two, brought his daughters to the enclosure.
he says people need to be educated about how important the bears are to taiwan.
"they are more precious than pandas," says tsai.
"they are very important with a smaller population.
if we don't protect them, they may go extinct. "
hwang is hopeful for the future of the bears and says she's been encouraged by the growing island-wide awareness of the animal's plight.
she now has about 25 volunteers working with her group, setting up camera traps high in the mountains to help track the bears' movements.
up in the mountains near dasyueshan, there is first-hand evidence of hope for the bears.
using a gps tracker, linked to a collar, hwang and her team track down a female bear who has been only showing small signs of movement for months.
this is likely because she has just given birth to cubs and has slowed her movements to a minimum to look after the young bears in safety.
"i do believe we can make a difference," says hwang.
"to be honest i do see a lot of change. "
to prevent the possible spread of the coronavirus disease (covid-19), legazpi bishop joel baylon has ordered the temporary closure of two pilgrimage sites in albay province.
these are the shrine of the divine mercy and the stations of the cross at kawa-kawa hill in the city of ligao's tuburan village.
"i am declaring this temporary closure of these pilgrimage sites in order to prevent the possible spread of the virus," cbcp news quoted baylon's circular dated march 19.
"this means that not even the private praying of the station of the cross nor a simple visit to the shrine shall be allowed.
kindly know that we are after the safety of everyone," he added.
the shrine features life-size sculptures of the 14 stations of the cross and is one of the popular lenten destinations in the province.
during holy week, thousands of pilgrims from different provinces visit the site to pray.
the bishop asked the faithful to instead pray the station of the cross with their respected families at home or privately.
people, he said, may also join the parishes and communities that offer online via crucis.
"we can still observe the lenten discipline of prayer by participating in the actual masses in our parishes, faithful recitation of the holy rosary and offering personal prayers," baylon said.
"in this way, we continue to make our lenten journey solemn and meaningful," he added.
if the planet continues to warm at current levels over the next 50 years, up to 3 billion people could be living in areas that are too hot for humans, a new study has found.
for thousands of years, humans have lived within a narrow "climate niche" where average temperatures are ideal for society to flourish, and conditions favorable to grow food and keep livestock.
in findings published in the proceedings of the national academy of sciences on monday, an international team of archaeologists, climate scientists and ecologists said that if heat-trapping greenhouse gas emissions continue at the current pace, by 2070 billions of people will be living in conditions hotter than those that have allowed life to thrive for the past 6,000 years.
for every 1°c (1.
8°f) of warming, 1 billion people will either have to migrate to cooler regions or adapt to extreme heat conditions, the study found.
tim kohler, an archaeologist at the university of washington and co-author of the study said that these findings can be viewed as a worst case or "business-as-usual" scenario of "what could happen if we don't change our ways. "
temperatures changing more than in past 6,000 years using data on historical global temperatures and the distribution of human populations, the researchers found that just like other species of animals, humans thrive best within a narrow "climatic envelope" around the world.
most of the world's population live in areas with a mean annual temperature of between 11 and 15 degrees celsius (51.
8 to 59 degrees fahrenheit).
a smaller band of between 20 to 25 °c (68 to 77°f) encompasses areas in south asia that are affected by the indian monsoon -- the annual rains that irrigates large swathes of cropland vital for food production.
surprisingly, the scientists said, humans have favored living in these conditions for the past 6,000 years -- that's despite recent technological advances such as air conditioning that have allowed us to push this boundary.
"as an archaeologist i always tell my students that our technology, our minds, and our cumulative culture have enabled us to live anywhere," kohler said.
"that's true of course.
but it turns out that there is a distinct climate zone in which our numbers are greatest, and within which we have also been most economically productive. "
but change could soon be forced upon us.
the earth is currently on track for 3°c of warming by 2100.  the study suggests that because land areas are warming faster than the oceans, temperatures experienced by humans are likely to rise by about 7.
5°c by 2070.  as our planet rapidly heats up due to rising emissions, the temperature experienced by an average person is projected to change more in the coming decades than it has over the past 6,000 years, the study found.
and it could have severe consequences for food production, access to water sources, conflict and disruption caused by migration.
"it's reasonable to conclude that if something has been reasonably stable for 6000 years, we're not going to change it painlessly or quickly," kohler said.
extreme heat areas will expand among the hottest places on earth is the sahara region of africa, which experiences annual mean temperatures above 29°c (84.
2°f).
these extreme conditions cover 0.
8% of the earth's land area.
however, researchers said that those extreme heat areas are expected to spread to 19% of the earth's surface, affecting 3.
5 billion people by 2070.   regions that stand to be affected include parts of sub-saharan africa, south america, india, southeast asia, arabian peninsula and australia -- regions with fast-growing populations, said chi xu, from nanjing university's school of life sciences, and another co-author of the report.
"those countries are mostly in global south, with the fastest population growing rate, such as india and nigeria.
these two countries are projected to accommodate the largest populations under extreme temperature conditions," chi said.
the study's projection of 3.
5 billion possible climate migrants goes far beyond the world bank estimates, which suggested 143 million people across south asia, sub-saharan africa and latin america were at risk of being displaced.
it's a dire warning of what could happen if the climate crisis is left unchecked.
but there is hope.
the scientists said that by rapidly and substantially reducing global carbon emissions, the number of people exposed to brutally hot conditions could be halved.
the authors explain that there are a number of uncertainties with how the climate crisis will fuel displacement and to what extent, and said the study can't be used as a prediction of migration.
the figures are also based on worst case projections and there are questions over how actions to mitigate against climate change, including "political developments, institutional changes, and socioeconomic conditions" may affect these outcomes.
"the worst case scenario can be largely avoided if effective cut of greenhouse gas emissions is achieved," chi said.
"many effective measures of climate mitigation and local adaptation would help to alleviate the negative influence of climate change on human societies. "
us president joe biden on wednesday tasked vice president kamala harris with tackling an influx of migrants on the mexican border, aiming to take charge of a situation that has energized opponents of the new administration.
"i can think of nobody who is better qualified to do this," biden said at a white house meeting with harris and other top officials as thousands flee violence in impoverished central america.
"when she speaks, she speaks for me," biden said, adding: "i give you a tough job.
"harris said there was "no question that this is a challenging situation.
"it marks the first time that biden has assigned a specific portfolio to harris, who is seen as representing a younger generation in the democratic party and has been constantly at his side since they entered office on january 20. the administration also announced that the san diego convention center would become the latest shelter for the rising number of migrant children and it sent a team to tour an existing facility in texas.
the convention center will accommodate up to 1,400 children, said a spokesperson for the office of refugee resettlement.
in a sign of shifting national focus, the san diego center until recently had been repurposed for the covid-19 pandemic as a homeless shelter that permits social distancing between beds.
speaking earlier to cbs news, harris acknowledged that the united states needed to speed up its processing of migrants' asylum claims and care better for them.
"it's a huge problem.
i'm not going to pretend it's not," harris said in the interview.
but she said that the administration, in office for less than 100 days, needed to repair a structure torn apart by former president donald trump, who rose to power on an aggressive anti-immigration agenda.
"we have to reconstruct it.
it's not going to happen overnight," harris said of the immigration system.
she also vowed a greater effort to address the "root causes" of the border situation — helping the so-called northern triangle of guatemala, honduras and nicaragua so its people do not feel they need to flee.
the washington post, in an analysis looking at data, said there in fact has been no "surge" of migrants entering the united states, with recent numbers in line with seasonal norms before the pandemic.
but more of the migrants are children, officials say, and the border influx has provided republicans a line of attack against biden, who in his first weeks has succeeded in his promises to ramp up covid vaccinations and to push through an economic package that offers relief to most americans.
republicans accuse biden of encouraging migration through a more welcoming approach than trump, who in his final year essentially closed the border to all undocumented migrants by citing a public health emergency from covid-19.
top house republican kevin mccarthy has spoken of a "biden border crisis" and former secretary of state mike pompeo tweeted that biden "supports restrictions on pretty much everything except the border.
"biden halted construction on trump's cherished wall on the mexican border and has moved to wind down a controversial trump policy, which migrant advocates say violates international conventions, in which asylum seekers are forced to wait in mexico while their cases are heard.
biden has also faced concern from fellow democrats who are alarmed at the conditions for children.
in one of trump's most draconian actions which his aides saw as a deterrent, the united states separated thousands of central american children from their parents.
while the biden administration is still expelling adults who arrive without documentation, it has refused to send back into harm's way children who are unaccompanied by a guardian.
secretary of homeland security alejandro mayorkas has acknowledged that the united states is falling short in its goal of transferring all children out of custody of border forces within 72 hours.
some critics accuse biden of replacing trump's unapologetically harsh measures with an approach of hiding the treatment of migrants by restricting media access.
the white house said it was committed to transparency and would work to let in more journalists on the ground.
one television network was granted access to pool coverage of wednesday's tour by white house officials and lawmakers of the center in carrizo springs, texas.
we're approaching the peak of tornado season, and the next few days will bring an increased threat of storms (oh, and flooding) to the middle of the us.
here's what you need to know to get up to speed and on with your day.
(you can also get "5 things you need to know today" delivered to your inbox daily.
sign up here. )
1.  coronavirus  it's been one year since the world health organization declared the novel coronavirus to be a pandemic.
since that time, 29 million cases have been reported in the us, and 529,000 people have died as a result.
across the world, at least 118 million people have been infected and 2.
6 million have died.
president biden will make his first prime-time address to the nation this evening commemorating the anniversary and encouraging the american people to stay strong to beat the virus.
biden yesterday announced the purchase of 100 million more doses of the johnson & johnson vaccine.
and congress passed the stimulus bill, so it shouldn't be long before biden signs it and we start seeing its first effects.
2.  cabinet  the senate has confirmed a new wave of biden cabinet members.
merrick garland, who spent nearly 24 years as a federal appellate judge, was finally confirmed as attorney general.
he now faces tough decisions on controversial issues like the capitol riot, criminal justice reform and the fbi's russia probe.
rep.  marcia fudge was sworn in as secretary of housing and urban development, and michael regan will lead the environmental protection agency.
regan worked at the epa in the clinton and bush years and will be the first black man to head up the agency.
he'll be a lead figure in implementing some of this administration's aggressive plans to tackle the climate crisis.
3.  immigration  the overwhelming numbers of migrants arriving at the southern border, especially children, are challenging the biden administration's commitment to humanitarian immigration policies.
internal documents reveal thousands of unaccompanied migrant children are being held in us border patrol custody for more than four days on average in facilities unfit for minors.
the law doesn't permit such detentions exceeding 72 hours.
on average over the past 21 days, customs and border protection encountered 435 unaccompanied children daily, up from a previous average of around 340 children.
the biden administration is hoping to address the root causes of these arrivals by improving situations in central american countries and restarting a program allowing at-risk central american youth to live with relatives in the us.
4.  china  china's parliament has officially endorsed a proposal for "improving the electoral system" of hong kong, further restricting the ability of people in the self-governing city to freely elect their leaders.
under the plan, chinese officials will have the power to select "patriots" to run for office and govern in hong kong.
meanwhile, beijing has escalated a long-running diplomatic spat with the uk by summoning britain's ambassador to china over an article she wrote on press freedom.
china's ministry of foreign affairs lodged a complaint against ambassador caroline wilson, saying she misrepresented chinese media.
tensions between the uk and china have grown over issues including the political future of hong kong and human rights in xinjiang.
5.  russia russia slowed down the speed of twitter yesterday after the company failed to remove what the country's media watchdog described as prohibited or harmful content.
however, the move temporarily took out some russian government websites, including the kremlin and the russian parliament portals.
the sites are back up, but the russian government says the actions against twitter will remain unless the platform removes the barred information.
what information, exactly, is the government prohibiting?
it relates to recent protests in support of opposition figure alexey navalny.
officials warned they would act against social media companies that didn't filter posts about protests the kremlin deemed as illegal or inciting people to demonstrate.
breakfast browse senators again introduce a bill to make daylight saving time permanent first some in georgia want to end it, now the senate wants to keep it.
listen, either we do dst or we don't.
just let us know before we change our clocks this weekend.
elon musk made $25 billion on tuesday meanwhile, we rescued some loose change from the dryer.
people traveling to thailand can now wait out their quarantine period on a yacht  mandated safety precautions, but make it fancy.
these epic girl scout cookie-inspired recipes put a new spin on classic flavors we can make you hungry in four words: thin mint mousse torte.
a utah woman found a 19th-century tombstone in her new yard congratulations, you've got ghosts!
happening later gun control legislation is back on the table the house is set to vote today on legislation that would expand background checks on all commercial gun sales, marking the first congressional move on significant gun control since democrats won the white house and the majority in both chambers of congress.
today's number 400,000 that's how many children are at risk of death due to famine-level conditions in parts of yemen, the un world food programme says.
about 47,000 people there are living in "catastrophic" famine-like conditions, and nearly half of yemen's population -- about 16 million people -- is living in "crisis" or "emergency" food security conditions.
today's quote "stop talking about dr.  seuss and start working with us. "
democratic rep.  tim ryan, who lashed out at gop colleagues while debating a pro-union bill.
ryan urged the party to end its preoccupation with last week's dr.  seuss controversy and come together and help "the damn workers in the united states of america. "
today's weather check your local forecast here>>> and finally 80,000 matches = 1 fiery spectacle  yes, setting these on fire looks awesome, but can we talk about how cool and well-made the match spheres are?
(click here to view. )
feeling hopeless?
burnt out?
you're not alone.
there are ways to combat that sinking feeling.
experts recommend talking it out, getting involved, and searching out the good among all the bad news.
here's what else you need to know to get up to speed and on with your day.
(you can also get "5 things you need to know today" delivered to your inbox daily.
sign up here. )
1.  george floyd former minneapolis police officer derek chauvin will appear in court today exactly two weeks after george floyd's death.
chauvin was the officer filmed on video with his knee on floyd's neck before he died.
he's been charged with second-degree murder, third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter.
also today, a third and final memorial service will be held for floyd in houston, where he grew up.
these key developments come after a second weekend of protests that have gone global, and grown to encompass more issues of systemic racism and police brutality.
in the uk, protesters toppled a statue of 17th-century slave trader edward colston, echoing several instances in the us where confederate monuments have been defaced, removed or designated for removal.
in brazil, protesters gathered in support of black lives matter, and to protest president jair bolsonaro's government, including its handling of the coronavirus pandemic.
2.  police reform  nine members of the minneapolis city council say they intend to defund and dismantle the city's police department.
council president lisa bender says they may shift police funding toward community-based strategies instead, and discuss how to eventually replace the current police force -- though bender stressed that is "not in the short term. "
the nationwide spread of anti-racist protests have led to calls to defund or outright abolish police departments, and some cities are considering other changes.
in new york city, mayor bill de blasio says the city will move some of its funding from the new york police department to youth and social services.
last week, los angeles mayor eric garcetti agreed to slash between $100 million to $150 million from the los angeles police department's proposed $1.
86 billion budget.
3.  coronavirus  the us government's current supply of remdesivir, the only drug known to work against covid-19, will run out at the end of the month according to a us department of health and human services official.
gilead sciences, the company that makes the drug, is ramping up to make more, but it's unclear how much will be available this summer.
in the long term, the company plans to have more than 500,000 treatment courses available by october, and more than a million by december.
though it's not a cure, remdesivir has been shown to reduce hospital stays for some covid-19 patients.
meanwhile, the global coronavirus death toll passed 400,000 this weekend, a sobering reminder that, despite waves of reopenings, the pandemic is an ongoing threat.
4.  economy employers added 3.
1 million jobs in may, giving an unexpected boost to a battered labor market.
but state and local governments are still cutting jobs, which could kill any real economic momentum.
among the growth last month, these two levels of government actually slashed more than half a million jobs.
one analytics firm predicts 3 million more state and local jobs could be at risk in coming months, including first responders and in areas like social services, sanitation, health care, education and municipal services like libraries and parks.
and while the economy might be doing better now, there may be more bad news around the corner.
economists believe a second wave of infections could deaden a rebound and put the american economy in new danger.
5.  south china sea maritime and military experts are worried that china is adopting increasingly forceful tactics in the south china sea.
the asia maritime transparency institute revealed chinese and malaysian ships were locked in a high-stakes standoff in the highly-contested area earlier this year.
beijing claims it was conducting "normal activities in waters under chinese jurisdiction," but chinese vessels have been accused for years of hounding countries who try to explore in the areas of the south china sea that china claims as its own.
the malaysia standoff was also one among many confrontational moves from the chinese government in the region this year.
the amti says these incidents could lead to larger conflicts with other powers in the area, including malaysia or indonesia.
breakfast browse ufc champion conor mcgregor is retiring  at least, for now.
(he made similar announcements in 2016 and 2019. )
a famed treasure chest said to contain gold and jewels has finally been found in the rocky mountains  and it actually did contain gold and jewels!
these seven jobs are making the biggest return in the recovering pandemic economy  construction workers, laundry workers, janitors and dentists are all back on the job.
the golden gate bridge has been 'singing' recently.
here's why.
chalk it up to aerodynamics -- and a key new addition.
today's number 2.
6 million that's how many black-owned small businesses there are in the united states, according to the census bureau.
digital search and download data shows the worldwide protests have led to rising interest﻿ in supporting black businesses.
today's quote "for those of you who feel invisible: please know that your story matters.
your ideas matter.
your experiences matter.
your vision for what our world can and should be matters. "
former first lady michelle obama, in a virtual commencement speech to 2020 high school and college graduates.
today's weather and finally rock solid  all of this treasure chest talk has us thinking about diamonds.
here's how they go from dull rock to brilliant showpiece.
(click here to view)
