Biden attacks Trump's Covid-19 response in South Korean op-ed and promises 'principled diplomacy' with North Korea.
the us, australia and japan have promised to continue "freedom of navigation" operations in the south china sea and called on beijing to endorse a legally binding code of conduct over the disputed region.
in a joint statement following a meeting monday of us secretary of state rex tillerson and his australian and japanese counterparts, the three officials "expressed serious concerns over maritime disputes in the south china sea. "
china claims almost all of the south china sea, and has heavily militarized some islands in the region and expanded other territories with major land reclamation work, turning sandbars into islands and equipping them with airfields, ports and weapons systems.
all or parts of the sea are also claimed by brunei, malaysia, the philippines, taiwan and vietnam, which has led to intense territorial disputes and naval standoffs.
the us and other nations have tested beijing's claims by conducting "freedom of navigation" operations around islands controlled by china.
last month, the guided-missile destroyer uss stethem came within 12 miles of triton island in the paracel archipelago, which is claimed by china, vietnam and taiwan.
territorial disputes in their statement monday, the three foreign ministers said they would "continue to fly, sail, and operate wherever international law allows. "
they urged all claimants in the region to "refrain from land reclamation, construction of outposts, militarization of disputed features, and undertaking unilateral actions that cause permanent physical change to the marine environment in areas pending delimitation. "
while china is the most active in terms of building up the territories it controls, both the philippines and vietnam have begun to follow beijing's lead.
the philippines scored a major legal victory last year, when an international tribunal in the hague threw out most of china's territorial claims, but since the election of president rodrigo duterte, manila has become less confrontational with beijing.
monday's joint statement described the ruling as "legally binding on both parties" and urged the philippines and china to abide by it.
code of conduct the ministers also called for a proposed code of conduct in the south china sea, to be negotiated by china and the association of southeast asian nations (asean), to be "legally binding, meaningful, effective, and consistent with international law. "
attempts to hammer out such guidelines have been ongoing for years, and asean members and beijing announced sunday that they had agreed a framework for a future code of conduct, but formal negotiations are not expected to start until november, according to cnn philippines.
chinese foreign minister wang yi would not comment on whether beijing supported the code being legally binding.
the framework is largely based on a 2002 declaration by asean members and china, and analyst greg poling of the asia maritime transparency institute told cnn last week that some asean nations remain suspicious of china's motives, seeing the slow pace of progress as "another delaying tactic by beijing. "
"asean set aside the tribunal ruling, didn't complain about continued chinese militarization of the south china sea, watered down its joint statements, and basically wasted a year, all so they could reiterate the same principles they already agreed to in the declaration on conduct 15 years ago," poling said prior to sunday's announcement.
by reutersvietnam has lodged an official protest with china following the sinking of a vietnamese fishing vessel in the disputed south china sea, vietnam said late on thursday.
vietnam and china have for years long been embroiled in a dispute over the potentially energy-rich stretch of waters, called the east sea by vietnam.
the fishing vessel was moored near da loi island in the paracel archipelago on march 6 when a china maritime surveillance vessel chased it and fired water cannon at it, vietnam's foreign ministry said in a statement.
the boat sank after hitting rocks while it was being chased.
all five fishermen on board were rescued by another vietnamese fishing boat, the ministry said.
a vietnamese rescue agency said earlier that the chinese vessel rammed the fishing boat.
"the chinese vessel committed an act that violated vietnam's sovereignty over the hoang sa archipelago, threatened the lives and damaged the properties and the legitimate interests of vietnamese fishermen," the ministry said in the statement, referring to the paracel islands by their vietnamese name.
vietnam had lodged a protest with china's embassy in hanoi and demanded that china deal strictly with its maritime surveillance agency to prevent similar incidents and to compensate fairly the fishermen for their losses.
a chinese foreign ministry spokesman in beijing was cited by chinese media as saying earlier that the fishing boat had sunk when the chinese vessel approached, and that the chinese crew had rescued the fishermen.
china claims 90 percent of the south china sea, where it has steadily expanded military and other installations on artificial islands and reefs, unnerving the region and angering washington.
in addition to vietnam, the philippines, malaysia, brunei and taiwan also have claims to parts of the sea.
by reutersdreamworks' animated movie "abominable" will not be released in malaysia after its producers declined to meet a censor board requirement to cut a scene showing china's "nine-dash line" in the south china sea, the movie distributor said on sunday.
the u-shaped line is used on chinese maps to illustrate its territorial claims over vast expanses of the resource-rich south china sea, including areas claimed by other countries.
vietnam pulled the movie from cinemas last week, while the philippines' foreign minister has called for the scene showing the map to be cut and the film boycotted.
malaysia's film censorship board said last week that it has given the green light for the movie to be screened in cinemas without the scene depicting the map.
"universal has decided not to make the censor cut required by the malaysian censor board and as such will not be able to release the film in malaysia," a spokeswoman for the film's distributor, united international pictures, told reuters.
malaysia's film censorship board did not have an immediate comment.
the film was set to be released in malaysian cinemas on nov.  7.
"abominable", about a chinese girl who discovers a yeti living on her roof, was jointly produced by shanghai-based pearl studio and dreamworks animation.
comcast owns dreamworks and its parent company universal pictures.
china claims most of the south china sea, through which more than $3.
4 trillion worth of goods are transported annually, under its unilaterally declared "nine-dash-line".
the line overlaps territorial claims made by malaysia, vietnam, the philippines, brunei and taiwan.
last week, malaysian foreign minister saifuddin abdullah said the country needs to boost its naval capabilities to prepare for possible conflict in the south china sea even as it pursues non-militarisation of the waterway.
chinese and malaysian vessels were locked in a high-stakes standoff for more than one month earlier this year, near the island of borneo in the south china sea.
the malaysian-authorized drill ship, the west capella, was looking for resources in waters also claimed by beijing, when a chinese survey vessel, accompanied by coast guard ships, sailed into the area and began conducting scans, according to satellite images analyzed by the asia maritime transparency institute (amti).
malaysia deployed naval vessels to the area, which were later backed by us warships that had been on joint exercises in the south china sea.
beijing claimed it was conducting "normal activities in waters under chinese jurisdiction," but for years chinese vessels have been accused of hounding countries who try to explore for resources in waters that china claims as its own.
now, experts say the chinese ships are adopting increasingly forceful tactics, which risks sparking new conflicts with major regional powers such as malaysia and indonesia.
greg poling, director of the amti, said the countries are more important than ever as chinese ships expand their reach in the region, mostly due to the advanced construction of beijing's artificial islands in the south china sea.
"(the islands) provide forward basing for chinese ships, effectively turning malaysia and indonesia into front line states," poling said.
"on any given day, there about dozen coast guard ships buzzing around the spratly islands, and about a hundred fishing boats, ready to go. "
nine-dash line the south china sea is one of the most hotly contested regions in the world, with competing claims from china, vietnam, philippines, malaysia, brunei and taiwan and indonesia.
beijing's territorial claims, known as the nine-dash line -- owing to the markings printed on chinese maps of the region -- are by far the largest and encompass almost the entirety of the sea, from hainan island down to the top of indonesia.
china's claims have no basis under international law and were found to be invalid in a 2016 international court ruling.
despite this, from about 2015 the chinese government began to bolster its territorial ambitions by building artificial islands on reefs and shoals in the south china sea, and then militarizing them with aircraft strips, harbors and radar facilities.
"these (islands) are bristling with radar and surveillance capabilities, they see everything that goes on in the south china sea," poling said.
"in the past, china didn't know where you were drilling.
now they certainly do. "
experts say beijing has created an armada of coast guard and chinese fishing vessels that can be deployed in the south china sea to harass other claimant's ships or sail in politically sensitive areas.
growing aggression the confrontation over the malaysian drill ship wasn't the first act of aggression by the chinese government in the region in 2020.  the year began with a standoff in the natuna islands on the far southern end of the south china sea, territory claimed by china and indonesia.
vessels from both countries were involved in the standoff, which began when chinese fishing vessels started to operate inside indonesia's exclusive economic zone.
eventually, indonesia deployed f-16 fighters and naval ships to the islands and president joko widodo personally flew to the area, in an unusual show of strength from the country.
in april, a chinese maritime surveillance vessel rammed and sank a vietnamese fishing boat near the disputed paracel islands in the south china sea.
the act prompted vietnam to send a diplomatic note to the united nations restating its sovereignty over its exclusive economic zone in the south china sea.
foreign ministry spokesman geng shuang responded by saying china would take "all measures necessary" to safeguard beijing's interests in the region.
"i want to stress this: attempts by any country to negate in any means china's sovereignty, rights and interests in the south china sea and to reinforce its own illegal claim are bound to be fruitless," geng said.
insecurity beijing has a long history of harassing other countries' vessels in the south china sea, mostly from vietnam and the philippines and also occasionally from malaysia and indonesia.
in the past, chinese diplomats have helped soothed aggrieved parties, but experts say the fallout from the coronavirus and the rise of so-called "wolf warrior" diplomacy in beijing have removed any circuit breaker in the relationship between china and its regional rivals.
"what has changed is that they've really taken the glove off of the fist diplomatically.
the statements are brash and unhelpful," said poling.
experts said beijing's growing forcefulness in the region is partly driven by the global coronavirus pandemic, which has dealt a heavy blow to china's rapid economic growth and damaged the country's international reputation.
at the meeting of its parliament in may, the chinese government didn't set a target for annual gdp growth for the first time in years, a sign that it is concerned about falling economic performance.
at the same time, tensions are rising with the united states and europe over beijing's role in containing the initial outbreak and whether it gave the world enough time to respond to the pandemic, which has killed more than 380,000 people.
concerned about appearing like its grip on power is slipping, the ruling communist party is doubling down on its rhetoric and on its nationalistic agenda, which includes control of the south china sea, experts said.
beijing is keen to foster a narrative that the us is retreating as a global power to solidify its hold on the region, said ian storey, senior fellow at iseas-yusof ishak institute in singapore.
"it will want to show southeast asian claimants that american military power is on the decline and its commitment to the region is waning," storey said.
"(it will want to show that) the economic problems that china is facing will not impact its policy on the south china sea. "
so far, malaysia and indonesia have tried to avoid letting south china sea dominate their relationship with china, but with beijing marking its territory in the region, the days of quiet diplomacy might not last forever.
"at what level of aggression does it become impossible to ignore?
.
.
.
at what point do they add their voice to the criticism that you've been getting for years and years from hanoi and manila?"
amti's poling said.
free-for-all facing an entrenched chinese presence on their doorstep, now might seem like the time for southeast asian nations to band together and face down beijing's presence in the region.
but storey said with regional powers preoccupied with coronavirus as well as their own economic and political crises, any hope of unity in the association of southeast asian nations (asean) was unlikely.
"no matter how hard china pushes i don't think we're going to see the asean members coalesce and present that strong united front against china," he said.
"i think going forward in the next six months, towards the end of 2020, we can expect china to double down on its assertive behavior in the south china sea. "
malaysia has long worked to balance the benefits of a close relationship with china with running its own independent foreign policy, amti's poling said, which is why previous clashes with chinese vessels in malaysian waters were kept out of the media as much as possible.
indonesia has in the past opened fire on chinese fishing vessels that failed to leave its waters, and president widodo's tough behavior in january showed he will not sit by while beijing moves into the natuna islands.
but experts say china won't be easily deterred.
"beijing believes it can wear down indonesian opposition; and eventually indonesia, much like malaysia, will realize that it has little choice but to accommodate china's presence," foreign policy research institute senior fellow felix chang wrote in january.
still, there is risk too for the chinese government.
the united states is already increasing its freedom of navigation operations in the south china sea, holding half as many in the first five months of 2020 as it did in the whole of last year.
washington is also working to directly support southeast asian nations in the south china sea.
the malaysian navy received its first batch of surveillance drones from the us in may.
and, during the west capella's operations, us navy warships performed what the us navy called "presence operations" near the drill ship while it was being monitored by the chinese vessels.
"the us supports the efforts of our allies and partners in the lawful pursuit of their economic interests," vice adm.  bill merz, commander of the us 7th fleet, said in a statement at the time.
speaking in a public lecture in may, james holmes, a professor at the us naval war college and former navy officer, said that as beijing pushes harder in the south china sea, the us may look like the better bet for a steady friend.
"i think china has actually seriously overplayed its hand by being so bullying and by being so aggressive," holmes said.
"that starts driving together allies that are worried about chinese aggression .
.
.
the more china pushes the more coalition partners are likely to unite and push back. "
any push back could cost beijing economically.
china has close trade ties with many of its regional neighbors, such as the philippines, malaysia and indonesia, and needs them for parts of its international agenda such as its much trumpeted belt and road initiative -- the country's interlinking web of regional trade deals and infrastructure projects.
"i think there's already been a lot of unease in the region about how china has used covid-19 to push its claims in the south china sea," said storey, from iseas-yusof ishak institute.
"china won't want to completely destroy its relations with southeast asia by pushing too hard. "
democratic presidential nominee joe biden attacked president donald trump's handling of the covid-19 pandemic in an op-ed for a korean media outlet friday and promised to engage in "principled diplomacy" in pursuing the denuclearization of north korea.
in an op-ed published in south korea's yonhap news agency, biden criticized trump's "failed leadership" during the pandemic, claiming he has "tanked our economy and shattered hope for many korean americans. "
visit cnn's election center for full coverage of the 2020 race "president trump knew how deadly covid-19 was back in january and did nothing to control it," biden wrote.
"more than 225,000 americans are dead.
some 30 million have lost jobs, hours, wages.
one in five small businesses have shut down, many of them korean american-owned small businesses. "
biden's op-ed was a direct and striking criticism of a sitting us leader in a foreign media outlet, and yonhap called the piece the "first of its kind to a south korean media company in the year of the us presidential election. "
the op-ed dropped just days ahead of election day in the us, where disarming north korea remains one of the most challenging foreign policy issues for whomever wins the white house.
the former vice president sought to contrast himself with trump's approach to diplomacy in the korean peninsula in his attempts to get north korean dictator kim jong un to agree to total denuclearization up-front.
"words matter -- and a president's words matter even more.
as president, i'll stand with south korea, strengthening our alliance to safeguard peace in east asia and beyond, rather than extorting seoul with reckless threats to remove our troops," biden wrote.
view 2020 presidential election polling in comments made to donors, first reported by the washington post, trump, in 2018, appeared to threaten to withdraw us troops from south korea if he can't get a better trade deal with seoul.
the trump administration also previously sought to get south korea to pay roughly 400% more to cover the cost of keeping us troops on the peninsula.
in his op-ed, biden wrote that if elected he'll "engage in principled diplomacy and keep pressing toward a denuclearized north korea and a unified korean peninsula, while working to reunite korean-americans separated from loved ones in north korea for decades. "
he added that as president he would work to fix the immigration system to provide a "roadmap to citizenship for undocumented koreans," as he said about 2 million korean-americans have made "innumerable contributions" to the country.
"as president, i'll continue to defend the american dream for everyone, so every korean american family has the same fair shot at prosperity and a better future," he wrote.
biden has been critical of trump's relationship with kim.
in a democratic primary debate back in january, biden said he would not meet with kim without preconditions, and that he would instead push china and other asian neighbors to pressure the country to abandon its nuclear ambitions.
build your own road to 270 electoral votes with cnn's interactive map trump met with kim three times over his presidency, first in singapore, then vietnam and finally at the demilitarized zone dividing north and south korea — becoming the first sitting us leader to set foot in the hermit kingdom.
but negotiations have been at an impasse since.
pyongyang has not tested any nuclear weapons or long-range missiles since november 2017, but has continued testing shorter-range missiles that could be used to target us troops or allies in the region.
on october 10, north korea unveiled what analysts believed to be one of the world's largest ballistic missiles at a military parade on a significant anniversary in pyongyang.
japan's military performed 25 missions in 2020 in defense of us ships or planes, a sign of the growing integration of two of asia's most powerful armed forces.
the number of what japan calls "asset protection" missions was up from 14 in 2019 amid a "severe security environment," according to an announcement from japan's ministry of defense.
the japanese military said the 25 missions involved japan self-defense forces (sdf) protecting us navy ships on four occasions while those ships were gathering information on ballistic missiles or other warning or surveillance activities.
in 21 instances, the missions involved protecting us aircraft that were in joint training with their japanese counterparts.
japanese authorities would not say when or where the missions took place, only that they "contributed to the defense of japan. "
american and japanese forces participated in a wide range of exercises last year in and around japan and as far away as the indian ocean.
defense analysts said if a hostile power took on the united states military in any of the asset protection missions, japanese forces could hit back at that foe.
"if american assets were suddenly attacked then the sdf would be expected to counter attack to prevent follow-up attacks on us vessels or planes," said corey wallace, an assistant professor at kanagawa university in japan.
however, japanese security expert narushige michishita, vice president of the national graduate institute for policy studies (grips) in tokyo, said it was unlikely the forces faced any real danger of hostilities.
"certainly, some countries' forces conduct dangerous maneuvers during us-japan exercises, so the americans and the japanese might have experienced a few unnerving events on some occasions," he said.
but both experts said the sdf announcement indicates the growing importance of the us-japan security relationship amid a time of increased threats in the region, and it sends an important message to potential adversaries.
"the point is that two forces are now regularly operating very closely together, and that they will be able to do the same in wartime or under stressed environment.
the capability to do so will certainly enhance deterrence against potential aggressive actions against japan, south korea, and even taiwan," michishita said.
"it's a more dangerous (contingency) than was permitted six years ago," said wallace.
abe expanded japan's military options in 2014, then-japanese prime minister shinzo abe pushed through a "reinterpretation" of the country's pacifist post-world war ii constitution, which tightly restricted tokyo's use of the self-defense force, to reflect the security environment of the 21st century.
a year later, japan's peace and security legislation, codifying abe's plan to allow a larger reach for the sdf, became law.
under article 95-2 of the law, japanese forces are allowed to fire their weapons in protection of us military ships and planes.
any operation involving "asset protection" must be requested by the us military, be approved by the japanese defense minister, support the defense of japan, and may not take place in an area of likely combat.
the law was first used in 2017, when the japanese helicopter destroyer js izumo escorted a us navy supply ship, michael bosack, former deputy chief of government relations at us forces japan, wrote in the tokyo review academic journal that year.
the law, and the japanese missions under it, belie an assertion in 2019 by then-us president donald trump that japan didn't need to come to the aid of the us if america was attacked.
"if japan is attacked, we will fight world war three .
.
.
with our lives and with our treasure," trump said, adding, "if we're attacked, japan doesn't have to help us at all. "
cooperation between the japanese and us militaries has increased in recent years as threats have emerged against japan, including north korea's ballistic missile program and ongoing tensions with china over the senkaku/diaoyu islands.
the uninhabited, rocky chain nearer to taiwan than tokyo, is controlled by japan but claimed by china.
successive us governments, including the biden administration, have reaffirmed that washington considers the islands to be japanese and would be obligated to defend them under the us-japan mutual defense treaty.
article 95-2 covers incidents that might erupt before any attack on japan that would possibly bring the mutual defense treaty into effect.
meanwhile, japan's military, especially its maritime self-defense force, has been increasing its presence far from its national shores.
japanese troops have conducted joint or multilateral exercises with a range of partners, including india, australia and the philippines as well as the us.
while china is engaged in a tense border standoff with india high in the himalayas, a small group of islands thousands of miles away could be another military tinderbox waiting to explode.
both tokyo and beijing claim the uninhabited islands, known as the senkakus in japan and the diaoyus in china, as their own, but japan has administered them since 1972.   tensions over the rocky chain, 1,200 miles (1,900 kilometers) southwest of tokyo, have simmered for years, and with claims over them dating back hundreds of years, neither japan nor china is likely to back down over territory considered a national birthright in both capitals.
in that respect, the islands are not unlike the rocky heights of the himalayas, where decades of tension on an ill-defined border between the territories of china and india erupted monday night, precipitating a clash that cost the lives of at least 20 indian troops.
the fighting, though deadly, was relatively confined -- and the two sides have talked down the tensions in the days since.
but an unexpected flare-up in the senkaku/diaoyus could trigger a military confrontation between china and the united states.
that's because the united states has a mutual defense treaty with japan.
if japanese territory is attacked by a foreign power, the united states is obligated to defend it.
fears of a possible confrontation were heightened last week with the announcement from the japanese coastguard that chinese government ships had been spotted in the waters close to senakaku/diaoyu islands every day since mid-april, setting a new record for the number of consecutive days.
by friday, those sightings had reached 67 days in a row.
taking unyielding stances in response to the increased chinese presence, yoshihide suga, japan's chief cabinet secretary, reasserted tokyo's resolve at a news conference last wednesday.
"the senkaku islands are under our control and are unquestionably our territory historically and under international law.
it is extremely serious that these activities continue.
we will respond to the chinese side firmly and calmly," suga said.
in a statement friday, china's foreign ministry echoed that japanese government's sentiments, from the reverse perspective.
"the diaoyu island and its affiliated islands are an inherent part of china's territory, and it is our inherent right to carry out patrols and law enforcement activities in these waters. "
similar comments were recently published in china's state-run global times newspaper.
the report, titled "japanese conservatives disrupt recovering china-japan ties by hyping diaoyu islands dispute," criticized attempts underway in japan's okinawa prefecture to change the administration of the islands, noting it could do serious harm to japan-china relations.
on its surface, the move, brought forward by the city council of ishigaki, where the islands are administered, seems fairly innocuous.
according to japan's asahi shimbun, the council wants to decouple the islands from the populated parts of ishigaki island to streamline administrative practices.
but in the resolution before the ishigaki city council, the city "asserts the islands are part of japanese territory. "
it's the kind of language that rankles in beijing.
"changing the administrative designation at this time can only make the dispute more complicated and bring more risks of a crisis," li haidong, a professor at the institute of international relations of the china foreign affairs university, told the global times.
the vote in ishigaki is expected at monday's council meeting.
before the past week, the most recent "crisis" over the islands occurred in 2012.  that year, japan nationalized the then-privately owned islands to ward off a planned sale to tokyo's then-governor, a hardline nationalist who was reportedly hoping to develop the islands.
the plan sparked massive and highly unusual street protests across china, amid a groundswell of nationalist sentiment.
demonstrations turned violent as protesters hurled debris at the japanese embassy in beijing, ransacked japanese stores and restaurants and overturned japanese cars.
in a stark illustration of how the islands are seared into the chinese consciousness, one chinese man was beaten into a coma by his fellow countrymen simply because he was driving a toyota corolla.
a history of contention china says its claim to the islands extend back to 1400s, when they were used as a staging point for chinese fisherman.
however, japan says it saw no trace of chinese control of the islands in an 1885 survey, so it formally recognized them as japanese sovereign territory in 1895.  a group of settlers manufactured dried fish and collected feathers, with the islands having more than 200 inhabitants at one point, according to japan's foreign ministry.
japan then sold the islands in 1932 to descendants of the original settlers, but the factory failed around 1940 and the islands were eventually deserted.
the japanese surrender at the end of world war ii in 1945 only served to further cloud the issue.
the islands were administered by the us occupation force after the war.
but in 1972, washington returned them to japan as part of its withdrawal from okinawa.
self-governing taiwan, which beijing regards as a chinese province, also claims ownership of the chain.
and objections to the administrative reclassification of the islands in taiwan shows the depths to which the islands hook their respective claimants.
tsai wen-yi, a city councilman in taiwan's yilan county, said if the japanese change goes through, he'll organize a flotilla of fishing boats from the area to "defend" the islands from japan, according to a report from the taipei times.
defense of the senkaku/diaoyus has been a priority of the japan self-defense force (jsdf) in the past few years.
the council on foreign relations notes tokyo has established new military bases nearby to protect the islands.
the jsdf has also been building up its marines and drilling them on island warfare.
although the islands are uninhabited, there are economic interests involved, according to the cfr.
the islands "have potential oil and natural gas reserves, are near prominent shipping routes, and are surrounded by rich fishing areas," it says.
what could trigger a clash  it all adds up to potential trouble, says william choong, a senior fellow at the iseas-yusof ishak institute in singapore "compared to other flashpoints in the region -- the south china sea, taiwan, and north korea's weapons programs -- the east china sea combines a unique and combustible mix of history, honor and territory," choong wrote this month on the interpreter, the blog of the lowy institute in australia.
the asia maritime transparency initiative (amti) paints a scenario where something easily imaged -- the crew of a disabled ship or plane landing on one of the islands -- could turn into a serious international incident.
"if chinese fishing crews, coast guardsmen, or military members landed on the senkakus, then the japan coast guard would no doubt seek to remove them in a law enforcement action.
but given that china does not recognize japan's claims, it is certainly possible that beijing could see this as an escalation, which might result in a substantial military response from china," the amti website says.
in the current climate in the indo-pacific, china is indicating it's ready to push its claims.
for example, in the south china sea, china has moved aircraft onto the man-made islands it has built up; it has sunk one vietnamese fishing boat and and rammed another; it has harassed a malaysian-chartered survey ship and sent one of its own into waters claimed by indonesia; in the past few weeks alone, chinese warplanes have been warned off by taiwanese fighters at least five times.
and in a ironic nod to what's going on in the east china sea, beijing reclassified its island claims in the south china sea, giving the spratly/nansha and paracel/xisha islands more prominent status in the country's governmental hierarchy.
then there's the india-china border in the himalayas.
before and after last monday's deadly clash, state-run chinese media was heavy with stories and images of the the new military hardware beijing could bring to bear in the mountains.
choong argues it would be unwise to think the senkakus/diaoyus aren't marked for similar attention at some point.
"the question is not whether china, now the target of a full-court press by america, would want to challenge japan over the islands.
the question is when, and how?
this is what keeps japanese (and american) policymakers awake at night," choong wrote.
global arms sales increased for the first time in five years in 2016 as rising geopolitical tensions fueled defense spending.
sales by the world's 100 biggest arms producers increased 1.
9% from the previous year to reach $374.
8 billion, according to the stockholm international peace research institute (sipri).
"the growth in arms sales was expected and was driven by the implementation of new national major weapon programs, ongoing military operations in several countries and persistent regional tensions that are leading to an increased demand for weapons," the group said in its report.
arms producers in south korea, which increasingly supply the country's military, saw the largest percentage increase among developed countries.
the spending splurge reflects fears of a potential conflict with north korea.
sales by south korean firms increased by over 20% in 2016, to $8.
4 billion.
while consumer purchases are included in the sales figures, national governments are by far the largest purchasers of arms and weapons systems.
american firms remained at the top of the industry in 2016, with sales increasing by 4% to more than $217 billion.
that was 58% of the global total.
american defense firm lockheed martin -- the world's largest producer -- saw sales surge 11% in 2016, thanks to increased deliveries of its f-35 fighter and its acquisition of helicopter producer sikorsky.
aude fleurant, director of the arms and military expenditure program at sipri, said that u. s.  growth was likely to continue.
president trump wants to boost the pentagon's budget and refurbish the u. s.  nuclear arsenal.
related: 'slaughterbots' film shows potential horrors of killer drones sales by russian firms increased 3.
8% to $26.
6 billion, a slower expansion than in recent years.
moscow has boosted spending in order to overhaul its military capabilities, but procurement has slowed recently because of the country's strained finances.
"it's a money issue," said fleurant.
"they have been hit very severely by the drop in oil and gas prices. "
related: the russian government is giving up control of kalashnikov fleurant pointed to regional disputes, such as the standoff over islands in the south china sea, as a major source of increased arms sales.
the area is home to crucial shipping lanes, and it's rich in oil and gas reserves.
china, taiwan, vietnam, the philippines, malaysia and brunei have all made territorial claims to islands in the area.
tensions have grown since 2014 as china has turned sandbars into islands, equipping them with airfields, ports and weapons systems and warned u. s.  warships and aircraft to stay away from them.
"countries like vietnam order submarines and maritime patrol aircraft, because of what they consider china's assertiveness in these territorial disputes," said fleurant.
