Why gay-friendly Taiwan is a creative haven for LGBTQ art.
in january 2019, nico yennaris gave back his british passport, moved to beijing and became a naturalized chinese citizen.
aged 26, he adopted a new name.
from now on, he would be called li ke.
growing up in east london, yennaris had perhaps the most british of boyhood dreams: he wanted to become a famous soccer star.
born in david beckham's stomping ground of leytonstone to a cypriot father and a chinese mother, yennaris got off to a good start.
aged 7, he joined the arsenal fc youth academy, a production line for premier league talent, and went on to play for the england national side at youth level.
but after a series of injuries cost him a prestigious scholarship, relegating him to the lower league dressing rooms, yennaris opted for another route to stardom.
he looked to china.
earlier this year, yennaris signed with beijing sinobo guoan fc, a club that is now worth more than italy's ac milan.
within months, he became the first naturalized player to score in the chinese super league (csl) and to play for china's national side, in a game against the philippines.
yennaris is not alone.
in january, john hou saeter, who also has a chinese mother, renounced his norwegian passport to become chinese and join beijing guoan.
and they could soon be joined by other foreign-born players who can't even claim partial chinese ancestry.
two brazilians and one portuguese transfers are tipped to join the chinese national squad in time for the qatar 2022 world cup.
players who are not ethnically chinese can play for the chinese side under fifa eligibility rules after five years of residency in that country.
their decision says as much about the rising power of a chinese passport as it does about the nation's monied sporting landscape.
perhaps more importantly, though, for a country in the grip of a han nationalist movement, it also raises important questions around identity.
"china has such a black and white definition of what's chinese and what is not," says cameron wilson, a chinese football writer in shanghai.
"this actually challenges the notion of what being chinese is in a very public way. "
the first swedish footballer in china when swedish midfielder pelle blohm arrived in northeast china to play for dalian wanda (now shide) in 1995, the city was gripped by sub-freezing temperatures.
"the siberian wind was coming in from the bay.
it was a winter but without snow," remembers blohm.
"it was not pleasant. "
in the 1990s, the swedish game was full of part-time professionals, the pay was bad and blohm says he was yearning for adventure.
professional football was only in its third year in china when blohm began playing in the jia-a season -- china's equivalent of the premier league, which became the csl in 2004 -- but blohm says the stadiums often attracted 35,000 fans, although that was short of their 55,000 capacity.
the level of professionalism, however, was lacking.
"the players were smoking and drinking a lot .
.
.
the football field was quite bad and there was never a dressing room.
we had to get ready in the hotel," says blohm, who was immediately asked to cut his long hair short, to conform with the league's strict appearance code.
the swede politely refused.
the club didn't employ an interpreter for two months, and before then "nobody spoke in english or any other language except chinese, as i can remember," he adds.
blohm, who was the first swedish professional soccer star to play in china, was paid in us dollar bills, but for months couldn't find a bank account that would even take his foreign currency.
dalian at the time was a city of 5 million people, with scant western influence -- no cafes, international brand-name shops or hamburgers, blohm says.
and few foreigners.
in the mid-1990s, most chinese hadn't been abroad.
and those who did travel went on group tours run by government-approved operators.
often, travelers had to wait around six months for a passport, says wolfgang georg arlt, who ran a beijing-based company organizing chinese tours to germany throughout the 1990s.
"and at that time it was not really passport, it was a piece of cardboard called an exit visa," he says.
couples were not often allowed to travel together -- "it was either the husband or the wife who could travel.
the other was staying behind as a hostage," arlt adds.
rattled by the collapse of communism in the soviet union in 1991, china was worried that once holidaymakers saw what was beyond their border, they wouldn't want to come home, he says.
"when i was in china, people were not even allowed to talk to a foreigner," arlt says.
"if i asked someone, 'where is the railway station?'
he would have to go and report that. "
after one year -- which blohm nostalgically calls the "the most important year in my life" -- the swede left china.
"mentally, i was really tired," he says.
certainly, the idea that blohm would trade his swedish passport for a chinese one was out of the question.
a point of national pride by the summer of 2008, beijing was dropping an astonishing $40 billion on the most expensive olympic games ever held.
its athletes won 51 gold medals at the games, the most of any nation in the competition.
and china was now the world's third-largest economy, behind japan and the united states.
the message being sent to the world was clear: with a soaring economy and growing political and cultural clout, china itself was now in the super league.
but none of that changed the fact it still struggled at soccer.
china hasn't been back to the world cup since its 2002 tournament debut.
and by july 2009 its team ranked 108th worldwide, according to fifa.
furthermore, match-fixing and corruption were considered so rife that an ethics committee was founded to clean up the game.
as vice president in 2011, chinese president xi jinping made getting better at the beautiful game a national goal.
as a child, xi had played football at school.
now he wanted the entire nation to fall in love with the sport.
businessmen including alibaba's jack ma were encouraged to invest billions in the csl, the all-male, 16-side championship.
wang jianlin's dalian wanda group (dwg) has also poured hundreds of millions of dollars into the sport.
soccer academies and pitches were planned across the sprawling nation, and an ambitious scheme to hire thousands of foreign coaches offered everyone from professions to gap-year students financial incentives to teach young chinese how to score.
as the cash came, so did the foreign talent -- albeit, mostly fading stars or youngsters with no chance at the big time in their native leagues.
in 2012, former chelsea striker didier drogba signed with shanghai shenhua -- while this year, manchester united midfielder marouane fellaini moved to shandong luneng.
transfer fees are never announced officially, but fellaini is rumored to have been bought for about $13 million.
that number was eclipsed by reports this week that welsh star gareth bale was leaving real madrid for a three-year deal with chinese club jiangsu suning that would see him earn $1.
2 million a week, before the spanish side blocked the deal.
foreign players are not subject to the 10 million rmb ($1.
45 million) salary cap that was recently imposed on domestic players, to prevent clubs from running up huge debts.
homegrown talent for xi, however, the goal was not to attract foreign stars.
it was to make chinese ones.
as a result, csl sides are only permitted to register four foreign players -- and can only pay three at once -- as well as one from a chinese territory, such as hong kong, taiwan or macao.
all csl teams have maxed out that quota.
"that's basically to ensure that chinese players can get playing time," said wilson, the expert on chinese football.
some sides have used the chinese territory rule to get more non-chinese players on their books.
nigeria-born alex akande, for example, lived in hong kong long enough to naturalize there and now plays for dalian as its one allotted player from the semi-autonomous chinese city.
foreign goalkeepers, however, have been outright banned from the league since 2001.  and in 2017, clubs were hit with a 100% tax, also designed to stem capital flight, on players who cost more than 45 million rmb ($7 million), that levy going into a grassroots development fund for chinese talent.
but wilson says that the millions of dollars in investment hasn't been able to make up for one crucial factor: china doesn't have a football culture.
"i think they're just not into football," he says.
"nobody will tell you that.
for a long time, even i was that person who was an advocate, saying: 'yeah there's a lot of potential here, it's a sleeping giant and it's a massive goldmine waiting to be discovered. '"
not a single super league match sold out in this 2019 season, with stadium capacity averaging at 51% full.
most of the csl teams make a loss.
manchester united, on the other hand, reported record revenues of £590 million ($730 million) for the year ending june 2018.
"the football culture we have in the uk is so profound and deep that it would take a long time for any country that doesn't have that to generate it," says wilson, who is from scotland.
kids in china simply don't grow up kicking balls around their block dreaming of bending it like beckham.
chinese for the long game?
if china lacks football culture, it's been shooting to win in soft power and economic might.
in a promotional video posted by his club, yennaris says he has "never questioned" his  decision to leave british football, and -- in sharp contrast to blohm's experience of dalian in the 1990s -- describes beijing as being very "similar to big cities like london, paris and new york. "
"ten years ago, it was absolutely unthinkable that someone would choose a chinese passport over a british passport," says philippe may, managing director of arton capital singapore, which compiles the annual passport index.
chinese nationality back then, may adds, would have severely limited a person's freedom of movement, but the chinese passport has gone from strength to strength over the past decade.
arlt, the german tour operator, who is now a professor in sinology specializing in chinese tourism, is skeptical.
he believes that athletes becoming chinese are banking on reversing that decision after having lucrative careers that were out of reach in their home nations, either because the market there was too competitive  or simply not rich enough.
"i don't think that these football players plan to spend the rest of their life in china," he says.
"if you earn $25 million playing football for three years in china, then maybe you'll be happy to say goodbye to a million to get a canadian or portuguese passport," he adds.
colin bloomfield, of hong kong-based immigration consultancy british connections, says that reclaiming a british passport is possible, but applicants need to
us president donald trump, right, and democratic nominee joe biden take part in the first presidential debate on tuesday, september 29.  at center is moderator chris wallace, who had his hands full as the debate often devolved into shouting, rancor and cross talk that sometimes made it impossible to follow what either candidate was talking about.
conservative women who support amy coney barrett's supreme court nomination pray while touching the court's doors on saturday, september 26.  a woman lies on the ground nearby, mourning the death of justice ruth bader ginsburg.
residents of the oakmont gardens senior home are transported to safety as the shady fire approaches in santa rosa, california, on monday, september 28.  in photos: wildfires burning in the west judge amy coney barrett reacts as us president donald trump introduces her as his supreme court nominee on saturday, september 26.  if her senate confirmation is successful before the november election, the appointment would mark trump's third supreme court pick in one presidential term.
tampa bay captain steven stamkos lifts the stanley cup after the lightning won the national hockey league title on monday, september 28.  this is the lightning's second stanley cup win in franchise history.
ju'niyah palmer, breonna taylor's sister, wipes away tears from the face of her mother, tamika palmer, while breonna's aunt bianca austin speaks at a news conference in louisville, kentucky, on friday, september 25.  a kentucky grand jury indicted one police officer involved in breonna's shooting death in march.
the decision was immediately criticized as insufficient by demonstrators and activists.
the flag-draped casket of justice ruth bader ginsburg is carried into the us capitol on friday, september 25.  she became the first woman in history to lie in state at the capitol.
us president donald trump speaks to white house reporters sunday, september 27, after the new york times reported that he paid no federal income taxes in 10 out of 15 years beginning in 2000.  trump denied the story and claimed that he pays "a lot" in federal income taxes.
model and tv personality chrissy teigen posted this photo of her and her husband, singer john legend, as she revealed that they had lost their child following pregnancy complications.
"on this darkest of days, we will grieve, we will cry our eyes out," she wrote on instagram.
"but we will hug and love each other harder and get through it. "
miami's starling marte is hit in the head with a pitch while playing the new york yankees on sunday, september 27.  he had to leave the game early, but he returned a few days later to start in the marlins' playoff opener.
sandra, a german shepherd, nurses two lion cubs at the white lion park in kiparisovo, russia, on tuesday, september 29.  the cubs had been abandoned by their mother.
joe biden, the democratic party's presidential nominee, gestures during his debate with us president donald trump on tuesday, september 29.  right-wing demonstrators, including members of the proud boys, kneel in prayer at a rally in portland, oregon, on saturday, september 26.  organizers of the proud boys rally called it a free-speech event in support of the president, the police and law and order.
they vowed to condemn anti-fascists and what they call "domestic terrorism. "
some of the proud boys carried firearms and wore body armor.
spectators watch a french open tennis match in paris on monday, september 28.  capt.
bryan woodward of the army national guard says goodbye to his wife, summer, and their children — from left, ellavyn, bryna and eros — at a deployment ceremony in austin, texas, on sunday, september 27.  he and other national guardsmen were heading to southwest asia for nine to 10 months as part of operation spartan shield, which seeks to strengthen relations with partner nations.
flames from the glass fire consume the black rock inn in st.  helena, california, on sunday, september 27.  britain's prince george holds a giant fossilized shark tooth that was given to him by naturalist and veteran broadcaster david attenborough on thursday, september 24.  the 7-year-old royal is seen here with his dad, prince william, and his brother, prince louis.
dwight howard grabs a rebound for the los angeles lakers as they take on miami in game 1 of the nba finals on wednesday, september 30.  the heavily favored lakers, led by lebron james and anthony davis, blew out the heat 116-98.  visitors wear face masks as they enjoy a ride at hong kong disneyland, which reopened to the public on friday, september 25.  us president donald trump gestures during his debate with challenger joe biden on tuesday, september 29.  arizona wide receiver deandre hopkins, top, is tackled by detroit's jeff okudah during an nfl game on sunday, september 27.  a flawless 102.
39-carat diamond is displayed by a model at a sotheby's auction room in hong kong on monday, september 28.  members of the lsu marching band sit apart from one another before a college football game in baton rouge, louisiana, on saturday, september 26.  a health worker tests a student for covid-19 after classes started at a college in the indian village of jhargaon on wednesday, september 30.  magawa, an african giant pouched rat, was given a gold medal by a british veterinary charity for his work detecting undetonated landmines in cambodia.
decades of conflict have left the southeast asian country littered with millions of landmines, unexploded ordnance, and other explosive remnants of war that still kill or injure dozens of people each year.
audience members sit with chairs in between them before the presidential debate in cleveland on tuesday, september 29.  there was a much smaller in-person audience than usual, and everyone attending had to take a covid-19 test and follow other safety protocols.
demonstrators are detained by police in new delhi while protesting the death of a 19-year-old rape victim on thursday, october 1.  the woman's death sparked protests that have spread to india's major cities.
four men have been arrested and booked for rape and murder, according to police.
atlanta's ozzie albies is hit by a pick-off throw while playing boston on friday, september 25.  supreme court nominee amy coney barrett looks at senate majority leader mitch mcconnell as they meet in washington, dc, on tuesday, september 29.  barrett, if confirmed, would be the fifth woman ever appointed to the court.
medical residents sit in the middle of a street as they protest their working conditions in barcelona, spain, on monday, september 28.   formula one driver valtteri bottas celebrates on the podium after winning the grand prix of russia on sunday, september 27.  connecticut center brionna jones goes up for a shot during a wnba playoff game against las vegas on sunday, september 27.  las vegas won the game and later the series to advance to the wnba finals.
a woman trims a dog's hair during a dog show in wuhan, china, on sunday, september 27.  democratic presidential nominee joe biden is hugged by his wife, jill, at the end of his debate with us president donald trump on tuesday, september 29.  trump is joined on stage by first lady melania trump.
aleix espargaro crashes during a motogp practice session in spain on saturday, september 26.  he was able to compete in the race the next day.
joel friedman observes the jewish atonement ritual of tashlich in canvey island, england, on thursday, september 24.  tashlich is a major theme of rosh hashanah, the jewish new year.
the tradition involves people symbolically casting off their sins, often by throwing morsels of bread into a flowing body of water.
see last week in 47 photos
around this time last year, taiwan was gearing up to host asia's largest ever pride parade having just become the first place on the continent to legalize same-sex marriage.
more than 4,000 gay couples have since taken advantage of the landmark legislation.
but beyond being able to tie the knot, the island's lgbtq communities are feeling the positive effects of the law in various other ways.
for taiwan's lgbtq visual artists, for instance, the past year has heralded new forms of creative expression, according to photographer su misu, whose explorations of gender identity, sexuality and bondage range from candid nudes to fantastical subversions of religious imagery.
"more and more people are exhibiting their own self-identity, using their creative voice to express individuality," she said over email.
"people are also beginning to construct the histories of the lgbtqi movement in taiwan, calling for others to participate and study it.
all this can help the gay community, which focuses on different issues, to thrive. "
even before the marriage legislation, lgbtq artists in taiwan enjoyed a level of creative freedom denied to their counterparts in many parts of asia.
beyond the legal rights of expression enshrined in its constitution, taiwan ranked 34th in the world (and 2nd in asia, after thailand) in a gay happiness index based on the experiences of 115,000 men from around the world.
a recent report on workplace equality by the island's oldest registered lgbtq organization, taiwan tongzhi hotline association, found that the territory's art sector was among the industries in which respondents felt "most comfortable" about coming out to co-workers.
coupled with the island's generous public arts funding, this atmosphere has produced a welcoming environment for lgbtq art.
and in 2017, just months after taiwan's constitutional court paved the way for the marriage law by declaring same-sex marriage a legal right, the gay art scene was afforded rare mainstream attention with the exhibition "spectrosynthesis -- asian lgbtq issues and art now. "
billed as asia's first major lgbtq art show, the program featured over 50 works by 22 artists (from places including hong kong, mainland china and singapore, as well as the asian diaspora) addressing a range of topics, from forbidden love to sexual violence.
staging the show at a large public institution, taipei's museum of contemporary art (moca), meant that lgbtq art had a rare opportunity to reach mainstream audiences, according to patrick sun, founder of the non-profit organization behind the show, sunpride foundation.
"if we do a show at a private gallery then i'm sure all my friends would come," he said in a phone interview from hong kong, where he's based.
"but we want to talk to the general public. "
a 'political victory' for one of the show's participants, 44-year-old avant-garde filmmaker su hui-yu (no relation to su misu), the show represented a "political victory" that proved especially heartening for young artists.
"in taiwan, it represented the changing of the wave (that) even a public museum would love to curate the show.
it's more symbolic in a political dimension than in (an) artistic one.
but i think it encouraged art students a lot. "
for su's generation, however, the gay art scene has long been flourishing.
although straight, his work has often explored lgbtq topics.
one of his most recent projects saw su film unrealized scenes from "the glamorous boys of tang," a homoerotic fantasy movie featuring orgies, killings and an exorcism, that was released without parts of the original screenplay, as su believes they were deemed inappropriate in conservative 1980s taiwan.
"there was already a strong tradition of queer study (and) queer art in taiwan since the 1990s (and) since the lifting of martial law," he said, over email, of the repressive military rule that formally ended in 1987.   it was this decade that saw the opening of lgbtq-friendly venues like it park and the gin gin bookstore, which has housed a gallery space in taipei for more than 20 years, alongside an explosion in gay literature, nightlife and academic discourse.
but while gay artists were free to practice their art, conservative attitudes persisted.
when same-sex marriage legislation was first proposed in taiwan in the early 2000s, it faced vociferous opposition.
so-called conversion therapy, a pseudoscience that attempts to "treat" homosexuality, remained prevalent (it was only formally banned in 2018).
organizers of a 2003 exhibition of works made by gay artists during consensual art therapy even felt it necessary to clarify in the show's notes: "this exhibition is not to show lgbt people need to be cured. "
in the euphoric aftermath of the passing of the same-sex marriage bill in 2019, it was easy to forget that 67% of voters had, in fact, rejected the idea in a referendum a year earlier.
the taiwanese government pressed ahead with the law, though some rights enjoyed by heterosexual couples, such as cross-national marriage, are still prohibited.
for 36-year-old photographer 526 (a pseudonym pronounced "five two six") it was family pressures rather than societal ones that stopped him from openly practicing his art, which includes intimate portraits of trans and lgbtq subjects taken in their own bedrooms (pictured top).
"even today, my parents are still afraid to tell their friends what i am doing," he said over email.
"it's frustrating that even your parents can't see your value, or tell others that their son is gay.
i hope they can be brave, because .
.
.
we need stand out and let all the people know: we are here. "
nonetheless, he said that visibility of lgbtq art is getting "better and better," and that taiwan's progressive environment "makes it a good place to make art. "
he pinpoints the legalization of same-sex marriage as not only a landmark in his artistic identity, but in his life more generally.
"i couldn't have imagined that (the law) would happen in my lifetime," he said.
"if i'd known this would happen, i would probably not have stayed in the closet for 31 years. "
a beacon for asia the relative freedoms of taiwan's lgbtq artists come into sharp focus when compared to their asian neighbors.
in japan and south korea, there are no real legal restrictions, though conservative attitudes prevent their respective scenes from thriving in quite the same way.
at the other end of the spectrum, homosexuality remains a punishable crime in parts of southeast asia, including malaysia, brunei and some areas of indonesia.
in between, there are a number of places that ostensibly allow gay art to be displayed, but where censorship remains a significant barrier.
in mainland china, for instance, authorities have been known to periodically close down lgbtq exhibitions without explanation.
meanwhile in singapore, where artists are permitted to exhibit lgbtq-themed work despite the fact that gay sex is illegal (a law that is rarely enforced), censorship is also common.
in 2016, authorities removed a number of items, including sex toys, from artist loo zihan's exhibition "queer objects," at the institute of contemporary arts singapore, due to obscenity laws.
(a few years earlier, loo responded to an age restriction placed on one of his shows by photocopying visitors' id cards and incorporating them into the displays. )
the idea that taiwan can serve as a beacon for the rest of asia was a key idea behind "spectrosynthesis. "
speaking to cnn at the time, curator sean hu expressed his hope that the taipei show would have "a ripple effect across asian society. "
indeed, a second edition of the show has since been held in thailand -- again at a mainstream, publicly-funded venue, the bangkok art and culture centre -- featuring almost three times the number of artists.
a third is planned for hong kong in 2022, with sun expressing hopes for them becoming a "new normal" in other asian cities.
with taiwan attempting to establish itself as a commercial arts destination (the launch of the taipei dangdai art fair in 2019 signaled that the island may hope to challenge hong kong's domination of the asian market), the island's gay artists could, in turn, benefit from the growing international profile.
one such artist, tzeng yi-hsin said she experienced an uptick in international inquiries after two of her images were featured in "spectrosynthesis. "
"i didn't get a lot of response or feedback from inside taiwan, but right after the show, i received more interest and approaches from people outside," she said, citing interest from japanese collectors and western media.
however, tzeng also expressed reservations about the exhibition's heavy focus on male artists.
only three of the 22 participating artists were female, with just one identifying as transgender.
(sun welcomed the critique, saying he "took it to heart" and is ensuring that his foundation makes "a conscious effort to include female and transgender artists. ")
for the 41-year-old artist and photographer, this curatorial decision represents a wider problem facing the arts in taiwan: that gay male artists continue to take a disproportionate chunk of the limelight.
"the majority of curators and collectors are male, and, from my perspective, they are more interested in gay male art," she said, adding: "we all notice that there are a lot of gay artists (in taiwan), but if a curator asks, 'who's a lesbian artist?'
no one knows. "
eschewing labels according to su misu, an oversimplification of lgbtq issues is another obstacle facing taiwan's gay artists.
she identified a variety of difficult or challenging topics that remain hard to address in mainstream forums.
"issues deemed 'taboo' need more visibility, including drug abuse, aids, sex workers, transgender people, disabled people and bdsm practitioners," she said, adding that exploring these topics could help challenge "inaccurate stereotypes about sex and gender. "
art that conforms with the public's existing ideas about lgbtq communities will, she said "only reinforce labeling minority groups. "
even the concept of lgbtq art itself may be a generalization said tzeng, who doesn't recognize the existence of a gay art "scene," per se, in taipei.
while some of her work directly addresses lgbtq themes, much of it is unrelated to her sexuality, such as her iconoclastic images defacing classic paintings or photographs of pop cultural and political figures like former taiwanese leader chiang kai-shek.
"i never identified myself as a gay artist.
i know my identity, but i'm just doing my own work. "
it's a point also raised by sun who, despite organizing lgbtq-themed exhibitions, said that artists' primary concern is "not to be labeled in expressing what they want to say. "
but whether that means organizations like his might, in an ideal future, no longer need to exist, is a moot point given the widespread challenges facing asia's gay artis
a romantic-fantasy film about a star and an igorot man has been named best film in this year's cinemalaya independent film festival.
titled "tokwifi," the 20-minute long movie revolves around a 1950s meztiza star who was trapped inside a television that fell from the sky and dreams up a romantic romp with a bontok igorot man who does not know how to kiss.
"in this film, i wanted to reflect the fact na outsider ako dito eh, ang dami kong insecurities being part of the bontoc community.
it symbolizes that.
so, i decided na i-merge ang mundo ng mga bituin — a manila star — at mga tiga bondoc," said director carla pulido ocampo when asked about inspiration of the film.
cinemalaya had their first ever virtual awarding ceremony on aug.  12.  unlike in the past 15 years, there were no full-length films in the lineup, and the festival instead focused on short films among others amid pandemic.
for health precautions, the film fest also "transitioned to virtual theater" via streaming platform vimeo.
the awards were also limited to six categories.
here's the complete list:best film – "tokwifi"best direction – martika ramirez escobar for "living things" netpac jury prize – "tokwifi"special jury prize – "ang pagpakalma sa unos" best screenplay – hubert tibi for "pabasa kan pasyon"audience choice award– "quing lalam ning aldo"the virtual awarding ceremony was hosted by glaiza de castro.
acclaimed filipino directors sari dalena and raymond reid, along with american film festival founder jeannette hereniko sat as jurists.
